Title: AgentSkiller: Scaling Generalist Agent Intelligence through Semantically Integrated Cross-Domain Data Synthesis

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2602.09372v1

Published Time: Wed, 11 Feb 2026 01:30:40 GMT

Number of Pages: 33

Markdown Content:
AgentSkiller Technical Report 

## AgentSkiller: Scaling Generalist Agent Intelligence through Semantically Integrated Cross-Domain Data Synthesis 

Zexu Sun †,∗,1 , Bokai Ji ∗,2 , Hengyi Cai 1, Shuaiqiang Wang 1, Lei Wang 3, Guangxia Li 2, Xu Chen 41 AMU, Baidu Inc. 2 School of Computer Science and Technology, Xidian University 

3 Singapore Management University 4 Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China 

† Project Leader, sunzexu0826@gmail.com , ∗ Equal Contribution 

Source Code: https://github.com/ZexuSun/AgentSkiller 

Dataset & Models: https://huggingface.co/AgentSkiller 

The rapid evolution of Large Language Model agents has demonstrated potential in solving complex real-world problems via external tools. However, advancing generalist agent intelligence is bottlenecked by the scarcity of high-quality, long-horizon training data. Existing synthesis methods fall into two categories: (1) collecting real-world API logs, often constrained by privacy and coverage, and (2) generating synthetic data through scripted interactions, which require manual validation and lack conversational diversity. Both approaches struggle to produce the data requisite for scaling generalist capabilities. To address these limitations, we propose AgentSkiller, a fully automated, scalable framework synthesizing multi-turn interaction data across realistic, semantically linked domains. AgentSkiller employs a reliable architecture based on Directed Acyclic Graph organized explicit state transitions to ensure determinism and recoverability. The synthesis pipeline follows five parts to turn ideas into fully functional environments. First, it builds a domain ontology and a Person-Centric Entity Graph to structure data around realistic scenarios. Second, it defines clear tool interfaces by generating Service Blueprints for Model Context Protocol servers. Third, it populates the environment with consistent databases and strict 

Domain Policy , ensuring data logic never conflicts. Fourth, a cross-domain fusion mechanism links services to simulate complex, multi-turn tasks. Finally, the pipeline creates user tasks by verifying solution paths with a planner and filtering them through execution-based validation, while a Persona-based Simulator generates natural language queries. An automated Rollout 

mechanism executes these queries to produce high-fidelity interaction trajectories. By expanding these scenarios, AgentSkiller produces reliable environments with clear state changes, creating a solid foundation for training next-generation generalist agents. Additionally, to demonstrate the effectiveness of AgentSkiller, we synthesized approximately 11K interaction data, experimental results indicate that models trained on this dataset achieve significant improvements on function calling scenario over baselines, particularly in larger parameter regimes. ToolACE-14B            

> Qwen3-14B
> MUA-14B
> EnvScaler-14B
> ToolMind-14B
> Deepseek-V3.1-671B-A37B
> xLAM-2-70B-fc-r
> Gemini-2.5-pro
> Qwen3-Thinking-235B-A22B
> GPT-OSS-120B-A5B
> Qwen-Coder-30B-A3B
> GPT-o4-mini
> Seed-OSS-36B
> Claude-Sonnet-4
> GPT-o3
> AgentScaler-30B-A3B
> Kimi-K2-1T-A32B
> AgentSkiller-14B (Ours)
> GPT-5-think
> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40
> 50
> 60
> 70
> Overall Score (%)
> 32.7
> 41.2
> 44.8
> 46.6
> 55.7
> 58.1
> 60.4 61.2 61.2 62.1 62.4 63.0 63.0 63.6 64.8 65.4
> 67.0 67.2 67.8

τ-Bench        

> ToolACE-14B
> Qwen3-14B
> xLAM-2-70B-fc-r
> EnvScaler-14B
> Qwen-Coder-30B-A3B
> ToolMind-14B
> Gemini-2.5-pro
> GPT-OSS-120B-A5B
> Deepseek-V3.1-671B-A37B
> MUA-14B
> Seed-OSS-36B
> Claude-Sonnet-4
> GPT-o4-mini
> Qwen3-Thinking-235B-A22B
> AgentScaler-30B-A3B
> Kimi-K2-1T-A32B
> GPT-o3
> AgentSkiller-14B (Ours)
> GPT-5-think
> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> Overall Score (%)
> 31.6
> 36.1
> 41.0 42.3
> 45.0
> 47.5 48.9 48.9 50.7
> 53.6 54.3
> 56.8 57.9 58.6
> 62.3
> 66.1
> 68.4
> 79.1
> 84.2

τ2-Bench            

> Qwen-Coder-30B-A3B
> xLAM-2-70B-fc-r
> Qwen3-Thinking-235B-A22B
> Deepseek-V3.1-671B-A37B
> Claude-Sonnet-4
> Qwen3-14B
> GPT-OSS-120B-A5B
> ToolACE-14B
> Seed-OSS-36B
> GPT-o4-mini
> AgentScaler-30B-A3B
> GPT-5-think
> GPT-o3
> Gemini-2.5-pro
> EnvScaler-14B
> Kimi-K2-1T-A32B
> MUA-14B
> AgentSkiller-14B (Ours)
> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40
> 50
> 60
> 70
> 80
> Overall Score (%)
> 24.1
> 38.4 39.1 40.8 42.5 44.2
> 50.8 52.0
> 58.4 60.0 60.0
> 62.0 63.3 63.4 64.0 65.0
> 70.0
> 78.0

ACEBench-Agent 

Figure 1 | Performance on 𝜏 -bench, and 𝜏 2-bench and ACEBench-Agent. Specifically, our AgentSkiller-14B achieves significant improvement on 𝜏 2-bench and ACEBench-Agent. 1

> arXiv:2602.09372v1 [cs.CL] 10 Feb 2026

1. Introduction 

The rapid rise of tool-using agents is driven by the need for Large Language Models (LLMs) to handle complex tasks beyond simple writing (Luo et al., 2025; Wang et al., 2025; Yao et al., 2022). By using function calling, LLMs can move past static text generation and operate across many specialized fields (Eleti et al., 2023; Schick et al., 2023). To be truly useful, agents must accurately understand user intent, extract context, call external APIs, and manage multi-step conversations (Patil et al.). These capabilities allow agents to access real-time data, creating a smooth user experience (Kim et al., 2024; Silver and Sutton, 2025; Wu et al., 2025). However, acquiring reliable training data remains a critical bottleneck. This challenge is exacerbated in complex, cross-domain scenarios, where generating high-quality interaction trajectories that span diverse environments becomes increasingly difficult. To address the issue of data scarcity, researchers typically employ two distinct strategies for generating synthetic agentic data. The first strategy adopts a reverse paradigm. In this approach, the system generates user queries to retrospectively match assistant function calls at each interaction turn. However, the resulting trajectories often fail to mimic realistic usage (Yin et al., 2025). The second strategy follows a forward paradigm, also known as simulated agent–human interplay (Barres et al., 2025; Chen et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024b; Prabhakar et al., 2025). Here, the process begins by formulating a high-level user intent to drive the interaction, effectively constructing agentic data in a “top-down" manner. Despite this structured approach, the generated interactions frequently lack naturalness. Furthermore, scalability remains a critical bottleneck. Without automated pipelines to construct these environments, large-scale deployment is impeded by the need for continuous manual intervention, rendering the generation of high-quality, multi-turn, cross-domain data infeasible. More recently, efforts to automate environment construction have emerged. APIGen (Liu et al., 2024b) collects 3,673 executable APIs across 21 categories to generate diverse function-calling datasets in a structured manner. AgentScaller (Fang et al., 2025) designs a framework that automatically con-structs heterogeneous, fully simulated environments to broaden function-calling scenarios. Similarly, ToolMind (Yang et al., 2025b) proposes a large-scale dataset with 160k synthetic instances using over 20k tools. EnvScaler (Song et al., 2026) builds automated framework for scalable tool-interaction environments via programmatic synthesis. Despite these advances, there is still a critical gap remains. Addressing generalist agent intelligence requires scalable training resources that expose agents to realistic, long-horizon, and diverse function-calling contexts. But, most of the existing synthesis approaches rely on collecting real-world API logs or generating simple synthetic interactions, are often constrained by limited coverage, privacy concerns, and a lack of high-quality multi-turn cross domain data. These limitations hinder the effective scaling of generalist agent intelligence. To overcome these challenges, we propose AgentSkiller , a fully automated, scalable framework designed to synthesize multi-turn interaction data across realistic, high-fidelity domains. Unlike previous ad-hoc methods, AgentSkiller employs a robust state-machine-driven architecture orches-trated by a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) to ensure determinism and recoverability. Specifically, our AgentSkiller is built upon three core design principles: a Dual-Model Architecture that decouples semantic reasoning from syntactic implementation, granular orchestration with automated check-pointing, and a Test-Driven Self-Correction mechanism that iteratively corrects generated code. The pipeline systematically broadens the space of function-calling scenarios through five sequential phases: establishing domain ontologies with Person-Centric Entity Graphs , standardizing Service Blueprints for Model Context Protocol (MCP) servers, implementing semantic grounding via constraint-satisfying databases, performing cross-domain fusion, and finally utilizing a Persona-Based Simulator to gener-ate natural language queries. By producing coherent, executable environments with deterministic state transitions, AgentSkiller provides a scalable foundation for synthesizing complex data to train next-generation generalist agents. To rigorously validate the utility of the proposed framework, we synthesized a corpus comprising approximately 11k multi-turn interaction trajectories using AgentSkiller. Subsequent experiments across challenging function-calling benchmarks, including 

> 𝜏

-bench, 𝜏 2-bench and ACEBench, demonstrate that models trained on this dataset yield substantial performance gains. Notably, the AgentSkiller-14B exhibits exceptional capability in complex tool-use 2scenarios, consistently outperforming established open-source baselines and achieving parity with state-of-the-art proprietary models. 

2. Problem Formulation 

We formalize the multi-turn interaction between the assistant and the user as a Partially Observable Markov Decision Process (POMDP) (Cassandra, 1998), defined by the tuple (U , S, A, O, P, R, 𝛾 ).

User Intent Space ( U). Let 𝑞 ∈ U denote the user’s latent intent or goal. This intent acts as a hidden condition driving the user’s responses. The assistant must infer 𝑞 incrementally through interaction history to generate appropriate actions. 

State Space ( S). The global state space S is composed of two subspaces: the physical environment state S𝐸 (e.g., database records, file systems) and the dialogue context state S𝐻 (e.g., user’s mental state and conversation history). At turn 𝑡 , the full state 𝑠 𝑡 = (𝑠 𝑡 𝐸 , 𝑠 𝑡 𝐻 ) ∈ S encompasses all information about the environment and the interaction. 

Action Space ( A). The assistant’s action space A = Atool ∪ A resp consists of two distinct types of actions: • Tool Invocation ( 𝑎 ∈ A tool ): The assistant executes an external API call to manipulate the environment or retrieve information. • Response ( 𝑎 ∈ A resp ): The assistant generates a natural language response to communicate with the user. 

Observation Space ( O). Since the true state 𝑠 𝑡 is partially observable, the assistant receives an observation 𝑜 𝑡 ∈ O based on its action. The observation space is defined as O = O𝐸 ∪ O 𝐻 , where O𝐸 

represents structured outputs from tool executions, and O𝐻 represents natural language feedback from the user. 

Transition Dynamics ( P). The transition function P : S × A → Π(S × O) defines the system dynamics. At turn 𝑡 , given action 𝑎 𝑡 , the system transitions to 𝑠 𝑡 +1 and emits 𝑜 𝑡 +1:• If 𝑎 𝑡 ∈ A tool , the environment state updates (𝑠 𝑡 𝐸 , 𝑎 𝑡 ) → 𝑠 𝑡 +1 

> 𝐸

, and the assistant observes a tool output 𝑜 𝑡 +1 

> 𝐸

∈ O 𝐸 . The dialogue state 𝑠 𝐻 remains effectively static regarding user intent, though the history is updated. • If 𝑎 𝑡 ∈ A resp , the dialogue state updates (𝑠 𝑡 𝐻 , 𝑎 𝑡 ) → 𝑠 𝑡 +1 

> 𝐻

, and the assistant observes a user reply 

𝑜 𝑡 +1 

> 𝐻

∈ O 𝐻 . The environment state 𝑠 𝐸 remains static during this turn. Crucially, the environment state 𝑠 𝐸 remains latent; the agent can only infer it through observations O𝐸 .

Interaction Policy and Objective. The assistant operates according to a policy 𝜋 (𝑎 𝑡 |ℎ𝑡 ), where ℎ𝑡 =

(𝑜 0, 𝑎 0, . . . , 𝑜 𝑡 ) represents the interaction history. The interaction concludes at turn 𝑇 when either the user issues a termination signal or a maximum turn limit is reached. The reward function R evaluates the quality of the trajectory 𝜏 = (𝑠 0, 𝑎 0, . . . , 𝑠 𝑇 ). We define the reward based on two criteria: (1) the effectiveness of the environment manipulation, measured by the cumulative state change Δ𝑠 𝐸 relative to the user’s intent 𝑞 , and (2) the quality of the communicative interface. The assistant’s objective is to find an optimal policy 𝜋 ∗ that maximizes the expected cumulative reward: 

𝜋 ∗ = arg max 

> 𝜋

E𝜏 ∼𝜋 

" 𝑇 ∑︁ 

> 𝑡 =0

𝛾 𝑡 R ( 𝑠 𝑡 , 𝑎 𝑡 , 𝑠 𝑡 +1)

#

(1) where 𝛾 ∈ [ 0, 1 ] is a discount factor. In our specific setting, the reward R is often sparse, calculated primarily upon the successful fulfillment of the user’s intent 𝑞 (i.e., task success) and the helpfulness of the final response. 33. AgentSkiller 

3.1. Overview 

To operationalize the objective defined above, we present AgentSkiller , a robust and modular frame-work designed to automate the generation of high-fidelity, cross-domain, function-calling task en-vironments for Large Language Model (LLM) agents. Furthermore, the AgentSkiller framework is capable of generating sophisticated cross-domain multi-turn dialogue datasets designed to simulate complex tasks with extensive interaction depth. Specifically, it adopts a state-machine-driven design orchestrated by a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG), ensuring determinism and recoverability throughout the generation lifecycle. 

3.1.1. Architectural Design Principles 

The architecture of AgentSkiller is built upon three core design principles to ensure stability and quality in large-scale synthesis: 1. Dual-Model Architecture: The framework decouples reasoning tasks from implementation tasks. A Textual LLM (e.g., GPT-5.2) handles high-level semantic reasoning (e.g., domain expansion, policy formulation), while a specialized Coding LLM (e.g., Claude Opus) is dedicated to syntactic precision (e.g., SQL generation, Python implementation). This separation optimizes both cost and performance. 2. State-Machine Orchestration: The pipeline is structured as a sequence of 18 atomic steps managed by LangGraph 1. Each step incorporates automated checkpointing, allowing the workflow to pause, resume, or recover from failures without data loss, which is a critical feature for long-running generation tasks. 3. Test-Driven Self-Correction: To mitigate the stochastic nature of generative models, a Test-Driven Self-Correction mechanism is implemented. Syntax errors or logical violations in the generated code (e.g., in MCP servers or database scripts) trigger an automated “Block Editor” that iteratively patches the code based on error traces. 

3.1.2. Pipeline Phasing 

The AgentSkiller framework is logically organized into five sequential phases, transforming abstract seed concepts into fully instantiated, executable environments. As comprehensively illustrated in Figure 2, this End-to-End Single-Domain Synthesis Framework operates as the foundational engine. The workflow follows a strict "Generate-Implement-Validate" progression: • Ontology & Blueprint (Left Panel): The process begins with semantically expanding seed topics into a person-centric entity graph (Steps 1–5), defining the structural boundaries of the domain. • Executable Implementation (Center Panel): Abstract definitions are then grounded into concrete databases and policy-compliant MCP servers (Steps 6–8). • Task Instantiation & Validation (Right Panel): Crucially, as depicted in the rightmost column of Figure 2, the pipeline culminates in a rigorous Execution-Based Task Filtering and Multi-Dimensional Evaluation phase (Step 10 & Steps 15–17). This ensures that only functionally robust, high-fidelity environments are retained as building blocks for the subsequent cross-domain fusion. 

Phase 1: Domain Ontology and Topology (Steps 1–3) This phase establishes the semantic boundaries of the simulation. Starting from a curated set of seed domains (e.g., Healthcare, Finance), the system iteratively expands the ontology into a broad corpus of topics. It then extracts domain-invariant 

> 1https://github.com/langchain-ai/langgraph

4Seed Topics Step 01 Domain Expansion Step 06 Constraint-Satisfying Database Generation Step 07 Domain Policy Generation Step 08 Policy-Compliant Executable Synthesis Step 15-17 Constraint-Aware Instance Grouping & Execution-based Task Filtering & Task instance with Scenario Grounding Step X Multi-Turn Dialogue Rollout & Multi-Dimensional Evaluation Step 09 - 10 Semantic Tool Dependency Modeling & Task Template Generation Step 02 - 05 Domain-Invariant Entity Extraction & Person-Centric Entity Graph Construction & Service Blueprint Generation 

Specialization 

Mental Health Health Care 

Contextual 

Airline Booking Hotal Booking 

Life Cycle 

Retiring Job Application 

User Centrold 

Insurance Hospital 

Support 

Supply Chain Restaurant 

ID: 1a64f754-e556-4d93-9f08 

Name: Michael Smith 

Date of Birth: 1987-04-08 

Sex at Birth: Male 

Blood Type: A+ 

Primary Language: English 

Phone Number: +527362747012 

Email: Micheal106@protonmail.com 

Patient 

ID: f21e6a12-d778-4091-9412 

Generic Name: Oseltamivirv 

Brand Name: Tamiflu 

Dosage Form: Suspension 

Strength: 30 mg 

ATC Code: A02AV46 

NDC Code: 65058-1570-15 

Storage: Light Protected Reimbursement Examine 

Prescription 

ID: 70c82-b911-4122-a099 

Date Prescribed: 2026-01-23 

Patient: 1a64f754-...-9f08 

Medication: f21e6a12-...-9412 

Dispense Quantity: 10 Capsules 

Status: Activate 

ID: 70c82-b911-4122-a099 

Date Prescribed: 2026-01-23 

Patient: 1a64f754-...-9f08 

Medication: f21e6a12-...-9412 

Dispense Quantity: 10 Capsules 

Status: Activate 

ID: 70c82-b911-4122-a099 

Date Prescribed: 2026-01-23 

Patient: 1a64f754-...-9f08 

Medication: f21e6a12-...-9412 

Dispense Quantity: 10 Capsules 

Status: Activate 

🔒 autherize_patient() Access & Lookup Clinical Checks Prescription Management 

⚠ check_drug_interaction() 

📝 create_prescription() 

🔁 update_prescription() 

📒 get_active_prescription() 

💲 calculate_insurance_copay() 

🔍 search_patient() 

🔍 search_medication() 

MCP Tools 

Domain Blueprint Entity Graph Core Entity Peripheral Entity Relationships 

Prescription Examine Reimbursement 

Entity Descriptions Entity Databases Relationship Databases 

Policy Generation Hallucination Correction 

Blueprints Example Policy Database Summary 

All Passed! Unit Test Failed Fix Unit Test Fix MCP Server 

MCP Server Unit Test Diagnose 

Blueprints Policy MCP Server 

MCP Server Implementation 

Status Dependency Start Tool Sink Tool Information Flow Storyline 

Tool Call Trajectory 

Step by Step Instruction: I'm at the self-service kiosk and ready to check out. Please authorize me with patient ID <Patient.patient_id> ,retrieve my medical record and the latest examination result for me to review. Once I've confirmed everything, update my status to 'RECOVER' and finally discharge me from the facility. 

Underlying Motivation: Perform a self-service patient checkout: verifying my own medical clearance results and formally closing the visit to leave the facility. 

Tool Graph Trajectory Translation 

ID: 70c82-b911-4122-a099 

ID: 70c82-b911-4122-a099 

Patient ID: 1a64f754-e556-4d93-9f08 

Patient ID: 1a64f754-e556-4d93-9f08 

Blood Pressure: 120 / 80 

Heart Rate: 72 bpm 

Temperature: 36.6 C 

Conclusion: CLEARED_FOR_DISCHARGE 

Status: UNDER_OBSERVATION 

Location: Recovery Room B-04 

Balance Due: 0.00 

Entity Consistency Feedback 

authorize_patient(ID= 70c82-b911.. )get_patient_record() get_medical_examine_result() update_status(Status=’RECOVER’) discharge() authorize_patient(ID= 70c82-b911.. )get_patient_record() get_medical_examine_result() update_status(Status=’RECOVER’) discharge() - Failed: Bill not paid! 

ID: 70c82-b911-4122-a099 

ID: 70c82-b911-4122-a099 

Patient ID: 1a64f754-e556-4d93-9f08 

Patient ID: 1a64f754-e556-4d93-9f08 

Blood Pressure: 120 / 80 

Heart Rate: 72 bpm 

Temperature: 36.6 C 

Conclusion: CLEARED_FOR_DISCHARGE 

Status: UNDER_OBSERVATION 

Location: Recovery Room B-04 

Balance Due: 5800.00 

All Succeeded Discard if exceeded max refinement attempts Refinement 

Wrong Grounding Information Golden Trajectory Execution Correct Grounding Information 

LLM Simulated User LLM Assistant 

MCP Server Domain Policy Interaction Guide Refer Follow 

Golden Trajectory Pruning authorize_patient(ID= 70c82-.. )get_patient_record() get_medical_examine_result() update_status(Status=’RECOVER’) discharge() authorize_patient(ID= 70c82-.. )get_patient_record() get_medical_examine_result() calculate_insurance_copay() get_active_prescription() update_status(Status=’RECOVER’) discharge() Passed if all matched! After Executing Gold Trajectory Inital Environment Context After Executing Actual Trajectory 

Action Evaluator Environment Evaluator 

> Golden Database Diff Actual Database Diff

⊆

Passed if actual diff includes the golden diff! 

Hallucination Check Communication Check Overall Score Policy Violation Check LLM Judge 

Passed if Overall Score higher than threshold! 

All Evaluation Passed At least 1 Evaluation Failed Task Known Information 

Rollouts Collection 

Hi, I would like to ... can you help me with that? Of course! I can help you ... Could you please provide ...? Figure 2 | The End-to-End Single-Domain Synthesis Framework. The pipeline progresses through 

Ontology Definition (Steps 1–5), Executable Implementation (Steps 6–8), and Task Instantiation (Steps 9–17). Crucially, the rightmost column details the Execution-Based Task Filtering and Multi-Dimensional Evaluation , ensuring only valid, high-fidelity environments are retained. entities and constructs a Person-Centric Entity Graph , modeling realistic relationships between human actors and system resources to ground the simulation in real-world interaction scenarios. 

Phase 2: Service Specification (Steps 4–5) Abstract entities are formalized into concrete service definitions, termed Service Blueprints , which correspond to Model Context Protocol (MCP) servers. This phase establishes the functional boundaries, listing available tools and data schemas. We enforce strict interface standardization, mapping abstract functions to executable function call schemas to ensure agent interoperability. 

Phase 3: Implementation and Semantic Grounding (Steps 6–9) Transitioning from specification to execution, this phase synthesizes concrete databases populated with constraint-satisfying data, generates rigorous Domain Policy documents to govern tool behavior, and implements fully func-tional Python MCP servers with accompanying unit tests. A key contribution here is the Summary Constraint Generation , which ensures relational integrity in the synthesized data. 

Phase 4: Cross-Domain Fusion (Steps 10–13) Designed to simulate complex, real-world interoperabil-ity, this optional phase (executed after single-domain validation) links different services together to simulate complex, multi-turn tasks. The system fuses their respective databases and policies into a unified execution context, enabling multi-hop reasoning tasks across service boundaries. 

Phase 5: Task Synthesis and Instantiation (Steps 14–17) The final phase generates the user-facing evaluation artifacts. It enumerates valid tool execution trajectories from the tool graph and grounds them in specific database instances via a constraint-solving planner. Subsequently, a Task Filtering 

module executes these grounded trajectories in a sandboxed environment to eliminate runtime failures. Finally, it synthesizes natural language user queries using a Persona-Based Simulator , ensuring the resulting tasks are semantically aligned with the simulated state and test for active information gathering. 5This structured approach ensures that the resulting benchmarks are not merely collections of isolated prompts, but coherent, executable environments where agent actions have deterministic and stateful consequences. 

3.2. Domain Expansion (Step 1) 

As the inaugural step of AgentSkiller, the objective is to extrapolate a comprehensive set of domain topics from a limited set of high-level categories. This constructs a broad semantic foundation for the subsequent entity extraction and tool graph construction, serving as the cornerstone for generating cross-domain data. 

3.2.1. Problem Formulation 

Let 𝐷 seed denote the initial set of seed domains. These seeds represent high-level industries such as healthcare , finance , and manufacturing . The goal is to generate an expanded set 𝐷 target such that  

> 𝐷 seed

⊂ 𝐷 target , 𝐷 seed = 𝑛 , and 𝐷 target = 𝑁 , where 𝑛 and 𝑁 are pre-defined hyperparameters (in our implementation, 𝑛 = 15 and 𝑁 = 300). The expansion process is driven by the Textual LLM M (e.g., GPT-5.2), which functions as a semantic generator. 

3.2.2. Expansion Strategies 

To prevent the generated domains from converging into repetitive or trivial clusters, a prompting strategy is designed to guide M in exploring the semantic space across five distinct dimensions. This ensures that the resulting topology covers breadth, depth, and temporal relationships: • Horizontal Association (Same-Context): Identifying parallel sectors within the same broader industry (e.g., expanding hotel to airline and car_rental ). • Diagonal Association (Cross-Context): Bridging intersections between distinct industries (e.g., linking healthcare with finance to derive medical_billing ). • Temporal Derivation (Lifecycle): Mapping sequential dependencies within a workflow (e.g., 

job_search → employee_onboarding ). • Hierarchical Refinement (Specialization): Drilling down from general categories to specific sub-sectors (e.g., healthcare → dental_services ). • Agent-Centric Mapping (Role-Based): Deriving domains based on specific operational roles (e.g., hospital → nurse_scheduling ). 

3.2.3. Implementation and Constraints 

The expansion process follows an iterative “Generate-Verify-Store” loop. At each iteration 𝑡 , the model generates a batch of candidate domains 𝐵 𝑡 (in our implementation, the batch size 𝑘 = 20). Strict syntactic and semantic constraints are enforced to ensure the utility of the generated topics: • Format: All domain labels are standardized to snake_case to facilitate downstream code generation. • Granularity: Labels are restricted to 1–3 vocabulary terms to balance specificity against general-ization, strictly avoiding overly broad terms (e.g., “management”) or hyper-specific scenarios. • Deduplication: A global set 𝑆 of unique domains is maintained. For every new batch 𝐵 𝑡 , the set is updated via 𝑆 ← 𝑆 ∪ 𝐵 𝑡 , discarding any duplicates to maximize semantic entropy. The process incorporates a checkpointing mechanism to support incremental generation and fault tolerance, ensuring the pipeline can resume from the last valid state until the target count 𝑁 is achieved. 63.3. Domain-Invariant Entity Extraction (Step 2) 

Following the establishment of the domain corpus, the subsequent step involves distilling abstract domain topics into concrete, reusable data structures. This module, Entity Extraction , aims to generate a standardized set of entities E and their associated attribute schemas from the expanded domain set 

> 𝐷 target

.

3.3.1. Global Extraction Strategy 

Unlike traditional iterative extraction methods that process domains sequentially, we employ a Global One-Shot Extraction strategy. The entire set of domain topics 𝐷 target is fed into the Textual LLM in a single context window. This approach allows the model to identify and consolidate overlapping concepts across different domains (e.g., recognizing that a Server entity in the “Cloud Computing” domain shares fundamental properties with a Server in “IT Management”), thereby enforcing semantic consistency and reducing redundancy at the source. 

3.3.2. Domain-Invariant Granularity Constraint 

To ensure the generated entities are viable for complex relationship modeling, a theoretical constraint known as Domain-Invariant Granularity is imposed. This constraint dictates that a valid entity 𝑒 ∈ E 

must satisfy three conditions: • Domain Specificity vs. Universality: The entity must be specific enough to hold meaningful attributes but broad enough to function across related sub-domains. For instance, generic terms like Person are rejected for lack of specificity, while hyper-specific terms like MiddleSchoolStudent 

are rejected for lack of generalization; Student is accepted as the optimal mid-level granularity. • Existential Independence: An entity must exist independently of other entities. Relational concepts (e.g., Enrollment , which depends on Student and Course ) are explicitly categorized as relationships rather than entities, and are deferred to the subsequent graph construction phase. • Semantic Stability: The definition of the entity must remain consistent across distinct domains. Concepts that shift meaning based on context (e.g., TicketType , which differs vastly between aviation and support desk contexts) are excluded. 

3.3.3. Attribute Schema 

Beyond basic identifiers, the Textual LLM is required to generate a high-dimensional feature set for each entity. To prevent the generation of superficial schemas, a mandatory expansion across four orthogonal dimensions is enforced: Physical Specifications (e.g., dimensions , storage_capacity ), Lifecy-cle Temporal Data (e.g., manufacturing_year , warranty_expiration ), State Configuration (e.g., is_active ,

firmware_version , access_level ), and Geospatial/Network Addressing (e.g., ip_address , geo_coordinates ). 

3.3.4. Post-Sanitization Process 

The raw output from the Textual LLM undergoes a deterministic post-processing phase to ensure system compatibility. First, a Namespace Collision Filter is implemented to remove system-reserved entities (specifically Session , which conflicts with the multi-turn dialogue architecture context). Second, a strict Primary Key Normalization rule is enforced, where the identifier for an entity 𝐸 is pro-grammatically rewritten as 𝐸 name . lower () + “_id” (e.g., LabEquipment → labequipment_id ). This standardization is critical for the automated generation of foreign keys in the subsequent database synthesis step. 

3.4. Person-Centric Entity Graph Construction (Step 3) 

Building upon the extraction of discrete entities, the pipeline advances to the Entity Graph Generation 

phase. The objective is to transition from a flat set of isolated definitions to a structured semantic 7topology. We construct a directed graph 𝐺 = (V , L) , where nodes V represent the extracted entities, and links L represent potential semantic interactions. 

3.4.1. Topology Definition 

To simulate realistic business scenarios, a Person-Centric architectural constraint is adopted. It is hypothesized that in enterprise simulations, operational blueprints are centered around human actors (e.g., Student , Clinician , Employee ) interacting with system resources (e.g., Course , Appointment , Project ). Formally, let E be the set of all entities extracted in the previous step. We identify a subset of actors 

P ⊂ E where the attribute is_person is true. The edge generation process aims to identify a set of directed links L ⊆ P × (E \ { 𝑝 }) , such that an edge ( 𝑝 , 𝑒 ) exists if and only if actor 𝑝 semantically operates upon or relates to entity 𝑒 within a specific domain context. 

3.4.2. LLM-Driven Relation Inference 

Determining semantic relevance between arbitrary entities requires common-sense reasoning that transcends static rule-based systems. We employ the Textual LLM as a zero-shot inference engine to judge the existence of relations. The inference process is governed by a Domain Relevance Prompt . For a given actor 𝑝 ∈ P and a candidate target entity 𝑒 ∈ E , the model is queried to determine if 𝑒 is relevant to 𝑝 in any plausible domain scenario (e.g., judging that a Ticket is relevant to a Passenger in the Travel domain). This approach effectively maps the latent knowledge within the LLM into explicit graph edges, creating a “hub-and-spoke” local topology around each human actor. 

3.4.3. Scalable Execution Strategy 

Checking relations between every actor and every other entity implies a complexity of 𝑂 (|P | × |E|) . To handle the potential scale of generated entities, a robust execution engine is implemented featuring: • Dynamic Batching: Candidate entities are grouped into dynamic batches (default size 𝑘 = 10) to fit within the optimal context window of the Textual LLM, balancing token consumption with inference latency. • Parallelization: Semantic checks are independent events. A thread pool architecture is utilized to process ( 𝑝 , batch 𝑖 ) tasks in parallel, significantly reducing total wall-clock time. • Fine-Grained Fault Tolerance: The system maintains an atomic progress log, recording results at the batch level. This allows for fine-grained checkpoints, enabling the pipeline to resume graph construction from the exact point of interruption without redundant computation. The final output is a NetworkX 2 compatible JSON graph, which serves as the navigational structure for the subsequent Blueprint Generation phase, allowing the system to distinguish between Core Entities (Actors) and Peripheral Entities (Resources). 

3.5. Service Blueprint Generation (Step 4) 

Leveraging the established Person-Centric Entity Graph , the subsequent challenge is to instantiate discrete, functional environments termed Service Blueprints , which define the interaction space for an LLM agent. A Blueprint effectively formalizes an MCP Server, encapsulating the state schema, data relationships, and executable tools available to a specific user role. We propose a multi-stage Coarse-to-Fine Generation Framework to synthesize these blueprints. Formally, a Blueprint B is defined as a tuple ⟨C , P, R, F ⟩ , where C is the Core Entity (Actor), P is a set 

> 2https://networkx.org/en/

8of Peripheral Entities (Resources), R is a set of relational data schemas, and F is a set of executable functions. 

3.5.1. Stage 1: Topology Sampling (Outline Generation) 

The first stage focuses on structural diversity. For every Person node identified in the Entity Graph, the system generates 𝑘 distinct Blueprint Outlines . An outline represents a potential use-case scenario (e.g., “CourseEnrollmentManager”). The system samples a subgraph centered on the Core Entity 

C and selects 1 . . . 𝑁 Peripheral Entities P from its immediate neighbors. This step ensures that the resulting service boundaries are logically coherent and grounded in the domain topology. 

3.5.2. Stage 2: Functional Synthesis with Feedback Loop 

This stage expands the high-level outline into a detailed specification. The Textual LLM is tasked with defining: • Relational Schemas ( R): Defining the data tables that track state (e.g., StudentCourseEnrollment ). To ensure database integrity, a strict Star-Schema Constraint is enforced: every relationship must include the Core Entity as a foreign key, and relationships cannot reference other relationships. • Tool Definitions ( F ): Generating API signatures (e.g., enroll_in_course ) that agents invoke to manipulate the state. To mitigate the stochastic nature of LLMs, a Constraint-Aware Feedback Mechanism is imple-mented. The generated blueprint is validated against rigid structural rules (e.g., maximum relationship depth, mandatory authorization functions). If a violation is detected (e.g., a schema missing the Core Entity reference), the system constructs a feedback prompt containing the specific error log and the rejected draft, instructing the Textual LLM to iteratively refine the output. This loop repeats up to 𝑀 

times, significantly increasing the yield of compilable blueprints. 

3.5.3. Stage 3 & 4: Semantic Refinement and Syntactic Sanitization 

The final phases focus on consistency and execution safety. A Fixup pass utilizes the Textual LLM to align terminologies, correcting entity name hallucinations (e.g., aligning “Advisor” to the canonical “AcademicAdvisor”). Finally, a deterministic Local Validation pass sanitizes identifiers to ensure they are valid Python tokens and normalizes foreign keys to follow the strictly typed format {𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡 𝑦 _𝑛𝑎𝑚𝑒 }_𝑖𝑑 .This ensures that the generated Blueprints are not only semantically valid but also syntactically executable in the downstream environment deployment. 

3.6. Tool Interface Standardization (Step 5) 

To operationalize the semantically generated Blueprints, the system enters the Tool List Formulation 

phase. This module serves as a deterministic interface adapter, translating the abstract functional definitions F within each Blueprint into the standardized JSON Schema specification required by modern LLMs (specifically the OpenAI Function Call format). This step ensures that the synthesized services are strictly machine-readable and executable by autonomous agents. 

3.6.1. Schema Transformation Logic 

The transformation process Φ maps a Blueprint function definition 𝑓 𝑏𝑝 to an executable tool definition 

> 𝑇 𝑠𝑐ℎ𝑒𝑚𝑎

. Formally, for each function 𝑓 ∈ F , the transformation is defined as:  

> 𝑇 𝑠𝑐ℎ𝑒𝑚𝑎

= Φ( 𝑓 𝑛𝑎𝑚𝑒 , 𝑓 𝑑𝑒𝑠𝑐 , 𝑓 𝑝𝑎𝑟𝑎𝑚𝑠 )

where the internal parameter types (e.g., Python-style str , int ) are coerced into JSON Schema types (e.g., string , integer ). 9To ensure the robustness of tool invocation during agent interaction, a Strict Parameter Require-ment Policy is implemented. Unlike standard programming interfaces where arguments may be optional, our formulation automatically populates the required field of the JSON Schema with all 

defined parameters. This constraint minimizes the probability of agents hallucinating default values or omitting critical arguments during the inference process. 

3.6.2. Modular Serialization 

To support scalable distributed deployment, the system serializes the tool definitions for each MCP Server into isolated JSON artifacts (e.g., RetailCatalogCheckout.json ). This modular output structure allows downstream agent environments to dynamically load specific toolsets on-demand, maintaining a clean separation of concerns between the service definition layer and the agent execution runtime. The processing is parallelized at the Blueprint level, utilizing a retry-backed execution engine to ensure data integrity during the serialization of large-scale service registries. 

3.7. Constraint-Satisfying Database Synthesis (Step 6) 

To ground the generated Blueprints in a realistic operational context, the system must populate the abstract schemas with concrete, semantically consistent instance data. A multi-stage Database Generation Pipeline is implemented to synthesize two categories of data: Entity Instances (representing the state of individual objects) and Relationship Instances (representing the interactions between objects). The main challenge in synthetic database generation is maintaining relational integrity, ensuring that generated interactions respect the latent logic of the domain (e.g., a math teacher should not be assigned to teach a history course). To address this, we propose a Summary Constraint Generation Architecture. 

3.7.1. Entity Instantiation and Summarization 

In the first phase, the system generates independent entity tables via Coding LLM-synthesized Python scripts, leveraging libraries such as Faker 3 to produce high-diversity attributes (e.g., names, timestamps, UUIDs). Crucially, immediately following generation, an Automated Summarization Module 

analyzes the output distribution. It extracts precise value ranges, categorical distributions, and data types for every attribute, producing a structured meta-profile (e.g., noting that Teacher.specialty 

contains values {Math, Physics }). 

3.7.2. Constraint-Driven Relationship Construction 

Naive random sampling frequently results in semantic violations in relational data. We introduce a 

Constraint Identification sub-step that utilizes the entity summaries to pre-compute logic rules. The Textual LLM analyzes the attribute profiles of participating entities to detect potential conflicts, such as: • Semantic Mismatch: Attributes that must align across entities (e.g., Doctor.department == 

Appointment.department ). • Temporal Consistency: Logic governing time-series data (e.g., start_time < end_time ). Based on these identified constraints, the system generates Active Construction Scripts . Instead of inefficient “sample-and-filter” rejection sampling, which has 𝑂 (𝑁 × 𝑀 ) worst-case complexity, these scripts employ an Index-Based Sampling Strategy . The generator pre-indexes candidate entities by their constraint keys (e.g., grouping courses by subject), allowing for 𝑂 (1) retrieval of valid pairs. This ensures that the resulting relational database is not only syntactically correct but also semantically plausible, mimicking real-world operational distributions. 

> 3https://faker.readthedocs.io/en/master/

10 3.7.3. Self-Healing Code Execution 

Given the stochastic nature of code generation, syntax errors are inevitable. We integrate a Self-Healing Execution Sandbox . If a data generation script fails during execution, the error trace is captured and fed back into a Block Editor (Coding LLM), which iteratively patches the code. This mechanism, combined with fine-grained checkpointing, ensures pipeline robustness even when generating complex, large-scale datasets. 

3.8. Domain Policy Generation (Step 7) 

While the Blueprint defines the structure of a service (i.e., existing tools), it lacks the logic of operation (i.e., success conditions). To close this gap, the system advances to the Policy Generation phase. This module synthesizes a comprehensive Domain Policy Document for each MCP Server, establishing the deterministic ground truth that governs agent-system interactions. 

3.8.1. Policy as a Deterministic Contract 

In this framework, a Policy is not merely a user manual but a computational contract. It rigorously defines the execution logic for every tool 𝑡 ∈ F , covering four dimensions: 1. Preconditions: System states that must hold true before invocation (e.g., “User session must be authenticated”). 2. Input Validation: Constraints on parameter formats (e.g., “ user_id must be a valid UUID v4”). 3. Permission Outcomes: A decision tree mapping state variables to access decisions (e.g., “Per-mitted if is_active is true; otherwise Rejected”). 4. Side Effects: The exact state mutations triggered by successful execution. This structured approach ensures that the environment responds deterministically to agent actions, eliminating the ambiguity often found in purely natural-language-based simulators. 

3.8.2. Closed-World Schema Adherence 

A critical challenge in generating synthetic policies is hallucination— Textual LLMs often invent business rules referencing non-existent data attributes (e.g., checking a premium_status flag that does not exist in the database). To mitigate this, a Closed-World Constraint is enforced. The generating Textual LLM is fed the Database Summary from Section 3.7 as a strict boundary condition. It is explicitly forbidden from referencing any attribute or relationship not present in the generated schema. To enforce this constraint computationally, a Policy Auditor module is introduced. This secondary Textual LLM parses the generated policy against the database schema, detecting hallucinations such as fabricated attributes or timeline violations (e.g., using real-world time instead of simulation time). If violations are found, the Auditor generates Search-and-Replace patches to automatically align the policy with the ground-truth schema. 

3.8.3. Structured Artifacts for Downstream Consumption 

To facilitate automated parsing in later stages (such as Trajectory Generation and Instance Selection ), the policy documents are encapsulated with machine-readable XML-style delimiters. This hybrid format combines the semantic richness of natural language (for agent comprehension) with the structural rigidity of code (for system execution), serving as the central reference point for the entire simulation lifecycle. 11 3.9. Policy-Compliant Executable Synthesis (Step 8) 

Upon defining the behavioral rules (Policies) and static tool definitions, the system proceeds to instan-tiate the runtime environment. This phase, MCP Server Implementation , synthesizes fully functional Python code for each MCP server. Unlike standard code generation tasks that rely on open-ended prompts, this approach is strictly grounded in the formal specifications derived from previous steps, ensuring that the generated executable is a faithful implementation of the Domain Policy. 

3.9.1. Template-Guided Code Generation 

To ensure architectural consistency across hundreds of generated services, a Template-Filling Strategy 

is employed. The Coding LLM is provided with a skeletal Python framework that defines the mandatory class structure, session management logic, and a unified invocation router. The model’s task is to populate this skeleton with domain-specific logic, translating the natural language constraints from the Policy Document into executable Python assertions. A critical feature of the implementation is the Confirmation Pattern for state-mutating operations. For any tool 𝑓 that modifies the database (e.g., create_order ), the generated code automatically injects a confirm parameter. This enforces a “Preview-then-Commit” workflow, allowing the agent to validate the effects of an action before final execution, thereby increasing safety in autonomous operations. 

3.9.2. Feedback-Based Self-Repair 

Code generation is inherently prone to subtle logical errors. To address this, the Test-Driven Self-Correction mechanism is implemented. Immediately after generating the server code, the system synthesizes a corresponding test suite using pytest , covering unit tests, session isolation, and policy violation scenarios. The Test-Driven Self-Correction loop operates as follows: 1. Execution: The system runs the generated test suite against the server implementation. 2. Diagnosis: If a test fails, the error trace and the relevant source code are fed into a Diagnostic Coding LLM . This model classifies the failure into one of three categories: Implementation Bug 

(logic error in server), Test Defect (error in test case), or Data Issue (invalid test data). 3. Patching: Based on the diagnosis, a specialized Block Editor (Coding LLM) generates a precise “Search-and-Replace” patch to fix the identified file. 4. Verification: The tests are re-run. This cycle repeats up to 𝐾 times (default 𝐾 = 5) until all tests pass or the budget is exhausted. This closed-loop system ensures that the final deployed servers are not only syntactically correct but also functionally robust and compliant with the logical constraints of the domain. 

3.10. Semantic Tool Dependency Modeling & Task Generation (Steps 9-10) 

Although the previous step establishes the executable implementation of tools, it lacks the temporal and logical context required for coherent agent execution. A flat list of executable functions (e.g., 

login , buy_item , logout ) does not inform an agent about the necessary order of operations. To resolve this, the Tool Graph Generation phase structures the functional space into a DAG 𝐺 𝑡𝑜𝑜𝑙 = (V 𝑡 , E𝑡 ),where nodes represent executable tools and edges represent execution dependencies, serving as the foundation for downstream Task Template generation. 

3.10.1. Dependency Taxonomy 

Three distinct categories of edges in E𝑡 are defined, prioritized by their constraint rigidity: 12 1. State Dependencies (Hard Constraint): Operations that require a specific system state prerequi-site. The most prominent example is the Authentication Gate , where sensitive operations depend on an active session state established by an authorize call. 2. Information Flow (Data Constraint): Dependencies where the output artifact of tool 𝐴 (e.g., a customer_id returned by search) serves as a mandatory input parameter for tool 𝐵 (e.g., 

get_profile ). 3. Storyline Flow (Soft Constraint): Probabilistic transitions based on typical user behavior patterns (e.g., view_item → add_to_cart ), used to guide the graph connectivity when no hard constraints exist. 

3.10.2. Topological Constraints for Valid Trajectories 

To ensure that any traversal of 𝐺 𝑡𝑜𝑜𝑙 yields a valid execution trace, strict topological properties are enforced during generation: • Single Source of Truth: The graph must possess exactly one node with an in-degree of zero (𝑑 𝑖𝑛 (𝑣 ) = 0), typically the authorize function. This guarantees that all generated trajectories inevitably begin with a valid authentication handshake. • Full Reachability: The graph must be strongly connected in the forward direction from the source node. Formally, for every node 𝑣 ∈ V 𝑡 , there must exist a path 𝑝 : 𝑣 𝑠𝑜𝑢𝑟𝑐𝑒 { 𝑣 . This ensures that no tool is functionally unreachable in the simulation. • Acyclicity: The graph must be a DAG to prevent infinite loops in automated planning generation. 

3.10.3. Generation and Validation 

The construction of 𝐺 𝑡𝑜𝑜𝑙 is performed by the Textual LLM reasoning over the Domain Policy and the implemented tool interfaces. The model explicitly identifies the dependency type for each edge. Following generation, a deterministic graph validation module audits the topology. If a graph violates any topological constraint (e.g., presence of a cycle or a disconnected component), the system triggers a regeneration cycle with feedback, ensuring that the downstream task generator receives only logically sound workflow templates. 

3.11. Semantic-Driven Cross-Domain Trajectory Fusion (Step 11) 

While single domains offer atomic capabilities, complex real-world tasks often span multiple service boundaries (e.g., booking a medical appointment and immediately filing an insurance claim). To simulate such high-fidelity scenarios, the Trajectory Fusion module is introduced. As detailed in Figure 3, this phase represents the Cross-Domain Composition Layer , which builds directly upon the atomic, validated environments established in Figure 2. The mechanism operates on two levels: • Trajectory Interlocking (Left Panel): The system semantically links distinct workflows (e.g., Airline and Hotel) via shared core entities, synthesizing coherent storylines that require multi-hop reasoning. • Policy Harmonization (Right Panel): To ensure governance consistency, conflicting rules from different domains are merged through a synthesis funnel (Step 13), producing a unified policy that governs the composite interaction. This hierarchical approach allows AgentSkiller to scale complexity without compromising the execu-tion stability guaranteed by the single-domain pipeline. 13 LLM Semantically Meaningful Domain Combination 

> Airline Policy Fused Policy Hotel Policy
> Inherit All Single Domain Constraints Merge Common Policies Add Cross-Domain Policies
> Common Fused Common Airline Specific Hotel Specific Tool-Specific
> Common Tool-Specific
> Combining domains semantically related and share the same core entity. Travel Schedual
> Healthcare Reimbursement
> School Enrollment
> Airline Booking Hotel Booking
> Cross-Domain Trajectory Fusion Coherent & Natural Storyline
> I am planning a trip. I need to book a flight to … and reserve a hotel near the destination for a three-day stay.
> Step 11-12 Semantic-Driven Cross-Domain Trajectory Fusion
> & Unified Relational Context Aggregation Step 13 Cross-Domain Policy Harmonization

Figure 3 | The Semantic Cross-Domain Fusion Mechanism. Building upon Figure 2, this phase (Steps 11–13) synthesizes composite scenarios. The left panel illustrates Trajectory Fusion via shared entities, while the right panel depicts Policy Harmonization to merge conflicting rules into a unified governance policy. 

3.11.1. Feasibility-Aware Fusion Logic 

Let G𝐴 and G𝐵 be the tool execution graphs for two distinct domains 𝐷 𝐴 and 𝐷 𝐵 , identified as a viable pair in the previous Domain Combination step based on their semantic relationship. A cross-domain trajectory is defined as a tuple 𝜏 𝑐𝑟𝑜𝑠𝑠 = ⟨𝜏 𝐴 , 𝜏 𝐵 , 𝑀 ⟩, where 𝜏 𝐴 and 𝜏 𝐵 are tool sequences from respective domains, and 𝑀 is a natural language Motivation Descriptor .A critical innovation in the framework is Single Domain Feasibility Filtering . Cross-domain trajectories are essentially composed of single-domain segments. If a segment (e.g., 𝜏 𝐴 ) has already proven infeasible during the single-domain validation phase (due to data sparsity or policy conflicts), any cross-domain trajectory containing it is predetermined to fail. Therefore, immediately after the Textual LLM fuses potential trajectories, the system cross-references them against the Validated Task Registry produced by the Task Filtering module (see Section 3.16) from the single-domain pipeline. Trajectories containing unvalidated segments are pruned ex ante . This optimization significantly reduces computational waste by preventing the execution of doomed trajectories. 

3.11.2. Incremental Parallel Synthesis 

Given the combinatorial explosion of potential trajectory pairs, efficiency is paramount. We implement a Domain Combination Level Parallelism strategy. Each domain pair is processed independently with automated retries for fault tolerance. Crucially, the system employs an Incremental State Tracker based on file-system artifacts. This allows the pipeline to support “resume-from-break-point” functionality, skipping already fused combinations and focusing solely on pending pairs, thereby ensuring scalability for large-scale benchmarks. 

3.12. Unified Relational Context Aggregation (Steps 12) 

Subsequent to synthesizing cross-domain workflows, the system must establish a unified data en-vironment to support the execution of these composite tasks. Since single-domain databases were generated in Section 3.7, simply referencing them individually is insufficient for modeling complex 14 interactions where entities (e.g., a User ) act as shared state carriers across boundaries. The Database Fusion module is implemented to construct a cohesive relational context for each domain pair. 

3.12.1. Entity Unification Strategy 

Let C𝑐𝑟𝑜𝑠𝑠 be a cross-domain combination involving server set 𝑆 = {𝑠 1, 𝑠 2, . . . , 𝑠 𝑘 }. The fusion process aggregates the complete entity set E𝑢𝑛𝑖 𝑓 𝑖𝑒𝑑 = Ð𝑠 ∈𝑆 E𝑠 , where E𝑠 includes both the core actor and all peripheral resources defined in the blueprint of server 𝑠 . This aggregation is purely deterministic, performed via a high-throughput file-system replication mechanism that copies the relevant JSON table artifacts into a dedicated fusion namespace (e.g., Hospital_Insurance/ ). This approach ensures that the subsequent task instantiation phase has immediate access to the full transitive closure of entities required for any multi-hop trajectory. 

3.12.2. Namespace-Isolated Relationship Mapping 

While entities are unified, relationships must maintain their domain specificity to avoid schema collisions (e.g., both domains might define a generic UserLog table). To resolve this, a Namespace Isolation Policy is enforced during aggregation. Every relationship table 𝑅 originating from server  

> 𝑠

is renamed to 𝑠 _𝑅 within the fused context. This simple yet effective transformation preserves the provenance of relational data, allowing the system to verify constraints (e.g., ensuring a Patient exists in both the Appointment and Insurance registries) without ambiguity. 

3.13. Cross-Domain Policy Harmonization (Step 13) 

Similar to database schema unification, the behavioral rules governing tool usage must be harmonized. Simply concatenating the policy documents of two domains (e.g., 𝑃 𝐴 and 𝑃 𝐵 ) is insufficient, as it fails to address inter-domain dependencies or conflicts (e.g., a “strict privacy” rule in 𝐷 𝐴 conflicting with a “data sharing” requirement in 𝐷 𝐵 ). To resolve this, the Policy Merge phase synthesizes a unified governance document 𝑃 𝑢𝑛𝑖 𝑓 𝑖𝑒𝑑 .

3.13.1. Conflict Resolution and Rule Synthesis 

The system employs a Textual LLM-based mediator to ingest the discrete policy sets. Its primary objective is not merely aggregation but harmonization . The model is tasked with: 1. Conflict Detection: Identifying and reconciling contradictory constraints between domains. 2. Interaction Rule Synthesis: Generating new “bridge rules” that govern the interface between domains. For example, if Domain A is a booking system and Domain B is a payment gateway, the synthesizer might add a rule: “Payment (Domain B) must only be initiated after a Booking (Domain A) reaches ’confirmed’ status.” 

3.13.2. Structured Policy Preservation 

To ensure that the downstream planner can accurately parse tool-specific constraints, the merger strictly preserves the structural integrity of the input policies. Using a marker-based strategy, the system ensures that while global rules are merged, the precise preconditions and post-conditions for individual tools remain isolated and identifiable, preventing “hallucinated” constraints from leaking between unrelated functions. 

3.14. Task Template Synthesis via Trajectory Enumeration (Step 14) 

While the Tool Graph provides the theoretical execution space for an agent, it does not directly yield user instructions. To train or evaluate agents, these graph topologies must be converted into actionable natural language prompts. This phase, Task Template Generation , automates the creation of high-quality task descriptions by mapping valid execution paths to semantic user intents. 15 3.14.1. Trajectory Enumeration 

We first identify valid execution sequences, termed trajectories . For single-domain tasks, the system systematically explores the tool graph 𝐺 𝑡𝑜𝑜𝑙 via a path-finding algorithm. For cross-domain scenarios, the composite trajectories synthesized in Section 3.11 are utilized. A trajectory 𝜏 = [𝑡 1, 𝑡 2, . . . , 𝑡 𝑘 ] is a linear path of tool nodes such that: 1. 𝑡 1 is a valid entry point (typically an authorization gate, where 𝑑 𝑖𝑛 (𝑡 1) = 0). 2. Each transition (𝑡 𝑖 , 𝑡 𝑖 +1) corresponds to a valid edge in E𝑡 .3. The sequence terminates at a logical endpoint ( 𝑑 𝑜𝑢𝑡 (𝑡 𝑘 ) = 0) or reaches a predefined maximum length 𝐿 𝑚𝑎𝑥 .A path-finding algorithm (based on NetworkX) is employed to enumerate all simple paths satisfying  

> 𝐿 𝑚𝑖𝑛

≤ | 𝜏 | ≤ 𝐿 𝑚𝑎𝑥 , ensuring a diverse dataset of task complexities ranging from simple lookups to multi-step workflows. For single-domain tasks, the generated instance combinations are forwarded to the subsequent Task Filtering step for execution validation. In contrast, for cross-domain scenarios, validation is integrated directly into the creation phase (Mode 2) to handle the sparsity of valid combinations efficiently. 

3.14.2. Semantic Template Generation 

For each trajectory, the Textual LLM is tasked with synthesizing a corresponding Task Template . The model receives the sequence of tools, their associated policy constraints, and the database schema. Its objective is to generate a natural language instruction that: • Encodes Motivation: Explains why the user wants to perform this sequence (e.g., “I need to register for a class”). • Preserves Variables: Uses symbolic placeholders (e.g., <Student.id> ) instead of hardcoded values, allowing for dynamic instantiation in later stages. • Avoids Hallucination: Strictly adheres to the functionality provided by the tools in 𝜏 .

3.14.3. Automated Quality Assurance 

To filter out low-quality generations (e.g., instructions that are logically incoherent or fail to trigger all tools in the trajectory), a distinct LLM-as-a-Judge module is integrated. This evaluator scores each generated template on a 5-point scale across five dimensions: Semantic Clarity, Logical Coherence, Completeness, Naturalness, and Specificity. Only templates exceeding an aggregate threshold 𝜃 are retained in the final dataset, ensuring a high-fidelity training corpus. 

3.15. Constraint-Aware Instance Grounding (Step 15) 

A primary limitation in current tool-use benchmarks is the decoupling of instructions from the underlying database state. An instruction like “Refund the order” is only executable if there exists an order in the database with status=‘refundable’ . To bridge this gap, the Instance Combos Selection 

phase is introduced. This phase grounds abstract Task Templates into concrete database instances using a Dual-Mode Strategy tailored to domain complexity: Sampling for single domains and Creation 

for cross-domain tasks. 

3.15.1. Mode 1: Single Domain Sampling 

For single-domain tasks, where data density is high, a Plan-Execution Architecture is employed: 1. Phase 1: Constraint Analysis (Plan): The Textual LLM analyzes the trajectory and Domain Policy to identify Trajectory Blocking Values —terminal states that would render subsequent tools 16 inoperable (e.g., selecting a ’shipped’ order for a ’cancel’ tool). It outputs a structured analysis comprising relationship operation types (CREATE/READ/UPDATE) and sequential constraints. 2. Phase 2: Code Synthesis (Execute): Based on the plan, the Coding LLM synthesizes a Python script to sample instances. It utilizes Relationship-First Sampling , prioritizing sampling from relationship tables (e.g., Enrollments ) over independent entity tables to guarantee referential integrity. 

3.15.2. Mode 2: Cross-Domain Creation and Validation 

In cross-domain scenarios, finding pre-existing instances that satisfy the intersection of multiple domain policies is statistically sparse. Therefore, a Creation-Validation Mode is adopted: 1. Dependency Analysis & Creation: The system parses explicit placeholders and infers implicit dependencies, allowing the Coding LLM to synthesize a Creation Code . This script generates new, policy-compliant entity and relationship instances specifically tailored to the trajectory’s constraints. 2. Parameter Completeness Verification: Before execution, the system verifies that the generated ‘value_domain_samples‘ cover every parameter of every tool in the trajectory. This step also enforces a consistent temporal anchor (e.g., fixing “now” to a static timestamp) to prevent temporal drift during execution. 3. Transactional Validation: To ensure isolation, the system performs a database backup before writing the new instances. A Trajectory Executor then runs the task against the augmented database. If successful, the data is committed and the trajectory is serialized into the Validated Task Registry ; if failed, the database is rolled back, and a Block Editor (Coding LLM) iteratively fixes the creation code based on error logs. This dual approach ensures that AgentSkiller efficiently handles both high-density single-domain tasks and complex, sparse cross-domain interactions without compromising database integrity. 

3.16. Execution-Based Task Filtering (Step 16) 

Targeting primarily the single-domain trajectories generated via the Sampling Mode, this step func-tions as a dynamic verification layer. Since the instance combinations generated in the previous step are theoretically derived from static constraints, they may still fail due to implicit logic gaps or runtime exceptions. To ensure the reliability of the benchmark, the Task Filtering module acts as a dynamic verification layer. This step explicitly executes the generated trajectories on the MCP servers using the synthesized instance data, filtering out any combinations that fail to reach the intended terminal state. (Note: Cross-domain trajectories bypass this step as they undergo intrinsic validation during their creation in Section 3.15.) 

Dual-Path Execution Mechanism. Validating thousands of trajectories via LLM-driven execution is computationally expensive. To address this, a Dual-Path Execution Mechanism is implemented to optimize resource utilization: • Slow Path (Generative Execution): For a novel trajectory 𝜏 without existing cached code, the Coding LLM synthesizes a dedicated Python execution script using the TrajectoryExecutor .This script dynamically handles authentication, tool invocation sequences, and return value assertions. • Fast Path (Cached Execution): Once a script is successfully verified for a trajectory template, it is hashed and cached. Subsequent validations for the same trajectory structure (but different data instances) bypass the LLM generation phase and directly execute the cached code. This mechanism reduces token consumption by orders of magnitude while enabling massive parallel processing. 17 Root Cause Analysis and Filtering. To ensure the robustness of the final dataset, the system employs a trajectory-wise parallel processing strategy. When an execution fails, the system does not simply discard the data but performs an automated Error Taxonomy Analysis . Failures are classified into Policy Violations , Invalid Entity Data , or Server Implementation Bugs . Only instance combinations that pass execution without error are serialized into the Validated Task Registry , ensuring that the downstream evaluation dataset is 100% executable and bug-free. 

3.17. Task Instantiation with Scenario Grounding (Step 17) 

The final stage of the generation pipeline transforms the execution-validated tuples (derived from the 

Validated Task Registry ), comprising the tool trajectory 𝜏 and the validated database instance 𝐶 𝑖 into a naturalistic interaction interface suitable for agent evaluation. This phase, Task Instantiation , bridges the gap between the structured “System View” (database records, function calls) and the unstructured “User View” (intent, ambiguity, partial information). 

3.17.1. Persona-Based Query Synthesis 

Naive template filling (e.g., simply replacing placeholders in “I want to delete order <id> ”) often results in robotic, overly explicit prompts that fail to test the conversational capabilities of an agent. To address this, a Persona-Based User Simulator is employed. The Textual LLM is prompted to adopt the persona of a user facing a specific problem grounded in the instance data 𝐶 𝑖 .The simulator is tasked with generating three distinct artifacts: 1. The Grounded Instruction: A fully instantiated version of the task template where variables are replaced with concrete values (e.g., “Grant John Smith access...”), serving as the gold-standard reference. 2. The Motivation Context: A plausible backstory explaining why the user is performing this action (e.g., “I have a client meeting in an hour”), enriching the semantic context. 3. The Startup Query: The initial natural language utterance sent to the agent. 

3.17.2. Information Asymmetry and Ambiguity 

A key contribution of the query generation strategy is the enforcement of the Information Hiding Principle . Real-world users rarely provide all necessary parameters in the first turn. To simulate this, the Startup Query is deliberately constrained to focus on a “Single Immediate Pain Point” (e.g., “I’m having trouble with my building access”) rather than a complete specification. This forces the evaluating agent to demonstrate active information gathering skills—asking clarifying questions to retrieve the necessary entities (e.g., “Which door?” or “Who is the visitor?”)—rather than merely acting as a slot-filling engine. 

3.17.3. Standardized Evaluation Artifacts 

The output of this phase is serialized into the JSON Lines (JSONL) format, creating a standardized benchmark dataset. Each record encapsulates the user’s initial prompt, a hidden “User System Prompt” containing the private knowledge required to answer the agent’s questions, and the ground-truth trajectory hash. This structure enables automated evaluation frameworks to not only check the final execution success but also assess the efficiency of the multi-turn dialogue. 

3.18. Multi-Turn Dialogue Rollout 

To conclude the data synthesis, the Rollout step is executed. This phase transitions from static task definitions to dynamic interaction logs by orchestrating a closed-loop dialogue between a target Agent 

and a User Simulator within the instantiated environment. 18 Initialized with the Startup Query and the hidden User System Prompt generated in Step 17, the User Simulator initiates the conversation to achieve its specific persona-based goal. The system acts as an orchestrator, forwarding the natural language input from the user to the Agent and executing the Agent’s tool calls against the mock MCP servers. This interactive loop continues until the Simulator determines that the latent goal has been satisfied or a termination condition is met. The result is a set of high-fidelity, multi-turn trajectories that capture the complete interplay between agent reasoning, tool execution, and environment feedback. 

3.19. Multi-Dimensional Evaluation 

To rigorously assess the data quality of the dataset generated via AgentSkiller, a comprehensive evaluation system is introduced, specifically designed for long-horizon, multi-turn tool-calling tasks. Unlike traditional benchmarks that rely solely on text matching, a Composite Evaluator architecture is implemented to assess both objective correctness (action execution and state transitions) and subjective interaction quality. 

3.19.1. Scoring Philosophy: The “All-or-Nothing” Metric 

This framework is underpinned by a strict “all-or-nothing” scoring paradigm. The success of a generalist agent is defined not by partial completion, but by its ability to execute a trajectory flawlessly across all dimensions. The final evaluation score 𝑆 𝑓 𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙 is calculated as the product of individual evaluator scores:   

> 𝑆 𝑓 𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙

=

Ö

> 𝑖 ∈ E
> 𝑠 𝑖

, where 𝑠 𝑖 ∈ { 0.0, 1.0 } (2) Here, E represents the set of enabled evaluators (Action, Environment, Subjective). Consequently, a failure in any single dimension—whether it be a missed tool call, a database consistency error, or a hallucination—results in a global failure for the task. 

3.19.2. Trajectory Pre-processing: Intelligent Pruning 

To prevent false negatives arising from efficient but non-standard agent behaviors, a Trajectory Pruner 

is introduced. This module preprocesses the ground-truth “golden” trajectories to identify and remove redundant operations before evaluation. The pruning logic adheres to two strict invariants: 1. State Preservation: State-changing operations (e.g., create , update ) are never pruned to ensure system integrity. 2. Redundancy Elimination: Read-only operations are pruned if and only if the information they retrieve is strictly a subset of information provided by preceding calls. For instance, if a list_accounts call returns balance details for all users, a subsequent check_balance 

call for a specific user is deemed redundant and removed from the evaluation requirements. 

3.19.3. Objective Evaluation Components 

The objective evaluation ensures that the agent strictly adheres to the ground-truth logic and maintains system integrity. 

Action Verification. This component verifies the sequence of tool invocations by comparing the agent’s execution rollout against the pruned golden trajectory. It employs a flexible matching logic that permits: • Order Independence: Allowing valid permutations of independent tool calls. 19 • Non-Destructive Additions: Tolerating extra tool calls (e.g., additional searches) provided they do not negatively impact the state. • Fuzzy Parameter Matching: Enforcing strict adherence for core parameters while allowing tolerance for floating-point values ( 𝜀 = 1𝑒 − 4) and case-insensitivity for string literals. Non-deterministic fields (e.g., free-text filters) are automatically ignored. 

Diff-Based State Consistency (EnvironmentEvaluator). To verify referential integrity without being brittle to stochastic identifier generation (e.g., UUIDs), a Diff-Based Comparison strategy is imple-mented. Rather than comparing absolute final states, the state delta induced by the agent ( Δ𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑡 ) is compared with that of the golden trajectory ( Δ𝑔𝑜𝑙𝑑 ) relative to the initial state. The success condition is defined as:  

> Δ𝑔𝑜𝑙𝑑

⊆ Δ𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑡 (3) This condition ensures that the agent performs all mandatory state mutations (inclusion validity) while permitting additional, valid auxiliary operations. Records are compared by content rather than identity, ensuring robustness against ID variations. 

3.19.4. Subjective Quality and Safety (LLM-as-a-Judge) 

Beyond functional correctness, an LLM-as-a-Judge mechanism is employed to assess the nuance of agent interactions, utilizing a detailed taxonomy of error categories: • Hallucination Detection (H1–H5): We rigorously flag groundedness errors, including status misrepresentation (H1), policy hallucination (H2), and unverified assumption of user intent (H5). • Communication Efficiency (R1–R2): The system penalizes redundant behaviors, such as re-requesting provided slots (R1) or querying information already exposed by previous tool outputs (R2). • Safety and Policy Compliance (S1–S2): We enforce strict adherence to safety protocols, specifi-cally flagging agents that omit mandatory confirmation steps before write operations (S1) or violate domain-specific operational policies (S2). 

4. Data Statistics and Analysis 

To validate the scalability and rigor of our AgentSkiller framework, a large-scale corpus of multi-turn interaction trajectories was synthesized. The final dataset consists of approximately 11,522 samples processed through the generation pool. This section analyzes the dataset across four critical dimensions: domain distribution, topological connectivity, semantic complexity, and fine-grained error taxonomy. 

4.1. Domain Distribution and Topology 

Leveraging the Domain Expansion (Step 1) and Service Blueprint Generation (Step 4) modules, the dataset achieves extensive coverage across high-stakes industrial sectors. 

Sector Breakdown. As detailed in Figure 4(a), the synthesized tasks are distributed among complex service domains, with Delivery & Logistics (24.5%) , Healthcare & Medical (21.8%) , and Payment & Finance (15.5%) constituting the majority. These domains were specifically targeted for their rigorous logic constraints and high demand for stateful operations, distinguishing this dataset from general-purpose open-domain benchmarks. 20 Delivery & Logistics 

> 24.5%
> Healthcare & Medical
> 21.8%
> Transportation & Travel
> 16.4%
> Payment & Finance
> 15.5%
> Retail & E-commerce
> 6.4%
> Access & Security
> 6.4%
> 2.7%
> 2.7%
> 3.6%

(a) Total Data Themes Single  

> Domain
> 5,941
> Themes in Single-Domain Subset
> Cross
> Domain
> Connections
> 7,179
> Cross-Domain Connections
> Cross
> Domain
> 11,763
> Themes in Cross-Domain Subset
> Healthcare & Medical
> Transportation & Travel
> Other
> Education & Training
> Delivery & Logistics
> Payment & Finance
> Access & Security
> EV & Charging
> Retail & E-commerce
> IoT & Sensors
> Food & Dining
> Employee & HR
> Property & Tenant
> Environment & Sustainability

(b) Data Themes: Single-Domain vs. Cross-Domain Connectivity 

Figure 4 | Data Theme Analysis. (a) The dataset prioritizes complex operational topics like Logistics and Healthcare. (b) The framework generates a dense web of cross-domain connections (center), resulting in a Cross-Domain subset (right) that is significantly larger than the Single-Domain subset (left), extending the interaction horizon beyond isolated tasks. 

(a) Semantic Keywords Cloud 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20           

> Number of Turns
> 0
> 250
> 500
> 750
> 1000
> 1250
> 1500
> 1750
> Frequency
> Single Domain
> Cross Domain
> 020 40 60 80
> Number of Tool Calls
> 0
> 100
> 200
> 300
> 400
> 500
> 600
> 700
> 020 40 60 80 100
> Number of Messages
> 0
> 100
> 200
> 300
> 400

(b) Complexity Metrics 

Figure 5 | Complexity Analysis. Cross-domain trajectories demonstrate significantly higher complexity in turn depth and tool usage compared to single-domain tasks. 

Cross-Domain Connectivity. Beyond isolated sectors, Figure 4(b) visualizes the dense topological connectivity achieved via the Trajectory Fusion mechanism (Step 11). The chord diagram demonstrates that the framework successfully bridges distinct service boundaries (e.g., linking Healthcare with 

Insurance ). Consequently, the volume of tasks in the Cross-Domain Subset ( 𝑁 = 11, 763 ) significantly surpasses that of the Single-Domain Subset ( 𝑁 = 5, 941 ), confirming that AgentSkiller effectively mitigates the scarcity of long-horizon, composite training data. 

4.2. Interaction Complexity and Semantics 

A core objective of AgentSkiller is to simulate realistic, long-horizon, cross-domain interactions. The semantic analysis (Figure 5(a)) reveals a prevalence of operational keywords such as “authorized,” “assignment,” and “validate,” confirming the tasks are grounded in rigorous policy execution. Further-more, the complexity metrics (Figure 5(b)) show that cross-domain tasks significantly extend the turn depth, with a long tail reaching 15–20 turns, requiring agents to orchestrate a larger set of functions to resolve composite user intents. 

4.3. Rigorous Quality Assurance and Error Taxonomy 

Unlike pipelines that prioritize yield over precision, AgentSkiller employs a strict Execution-Based Task Filtering mechanism (Step 16). 

Filtration Robustness. As shown in Figure 6(b), 4,299 samples (approximately 31.5% of the total pool) were excluded for failing to meet the “All-or-Nothing” criteria. These exclusions are distributed across both single-domain and cross-domain tasks, serving as empirical evidence of the pipeline’s 21 Total Samples  

> 13,649
> Score 1: 314 (2.3%)
> Score 2: 1,710 (12.5%)
> Score 3: 5,429 (39.8%)
> Score 4: 4,932 (36.1%)
> Score 5: 1,264 (9.3%)
> Total Issues
> 9,120 H2: Policy/Rule Hallucination: 1,294 (14.2%)
> H3: Data Hallucination: 1,144 (12.5%)
> H5: Request Hallucination: 830 (9.1%)
> H4: Tool Response Misalignment: 640 (7.0%)
> H1: Status Misrepresentation: 282 (3.1%)
> R4: Unnecessary Tool Calls: 2,046 (22.4%)
> R3: Semantic Repetition: 55 (0.6%)
> R1: Slot-Filling Redundancy: 24 (0.3%)
> R2: Tool-Awareness Redundancy: 18 (0.2%)
> S1: Confirmation Omission: 2,781 (30.5%)
> S2: Policy Violation: 6 (0.1%)

(a) Score Distribution & Error Taxonomy Single-Domain   

> Total: 6,906
> Cross-Domain
> Total: 6,773
> Passed Failed

(b) Excluded Samples (Total: 1,887) 

Figure 6 | Quality Assurance Statistics. (a) The error taxonomy analyzes the issues found in the excluded samples, where the landscape is dominated by safety violations (S1) and efficiency bottlenecks (R4). (b) The donut charts of excluded samples demonstrate the rigorous, domain-agnostic filtration process across both domains. unbiased rigor in eliminating execution failures. 

Error Analysis. Figure 6(a) breaks down the 9,120 specific issues identified within these excluded samples. The distribution highlights the primary challenges for agents: • Safety (S1): Confirmation Omission is the most prevalent error (30.5%), reflecting the strict enforcement of safety protocols for state-mutating actions. • Efficiency (R4): Unnecessary Tool Calls (22.4%) indicate that agents often struggle with optimal planning. • Hallucination (H2/H3): Errors in Policy Hallucination (14.2%) and Data Hallucination (12.5%) confirm that the benchmark effectively tests context grounding. 

5. Experiments 

To assess the efficacy of our dataset, we apply supervised fine-tuning (SFT) on the models of varying sizes and analyzed their performance. We first detail the training setup, then proceed to evaluate these models relative to key baselines on popular function-calling benchmarks. 

5.1. Experimental Setup 

• Model and Fine-tuning Setup. We perform SFT on Qwen3-4B, Qwen3-8B, and Qwen3-14B (Yang et al., 2025a). The training is conducted using the verl (Sheng et al., 2025) framework with a sequence length of 128k, a learning rate of 1e-5, and a warmup ratio of 0.1. We utilize a cosine learning rate scheduler, setting the weight decay to 0.01, gradient clipping to 1.0, and optimizer betas to (0.9, 0.95 ).• Benchmarks. We evaluate our models on three widely used function-calling benchmarks: 𝜏 -Bench (Yao et al., 2024), 𝜏 2-bench (Barres et al., 2025) and ACEBench (Chen et al., 2025). For a comprehensive comparison, we incorporate results from both open-source models GPT-OSS-120B (Agarwal et al., 2025), Deepseek-V3.1 4, Kimi-K2-1T (Team et al., 2025), Qwen3-Thinking-235B (Yang et al., 2025a), Seed-OSS-36B 5, Qwen3-Coder-30B-A3B 6, xLAM-2 series (Prabhakar et al., 2025), and recent baselines including AgentScaler (Fang et al., 2025), ToolMind (Yang et al., 2025b), EnvScaler (Song et al., 2026), MUA (Zhao et al., 2025), and ToolACE (Liu et al., 2024a); and closed-source models Gemini-2.5-Pro (Comanici et al., 2025), Claude-Sonnet-4 7,

4https://huggingface.co/deepseek-ai/DeepSeek-V3.1 

5https://github.com/ByteDance-Seed/seed-oss 

6https://huggingface.co/Qwen/Qwen3-Coder-30B-A3B-Instruct 

7https://www.anthropic.com/news/claude-4 

22 GPT-o3 8, GPT-o4-mini 9, and GPT-5-think 10 . For 𝜏 -Bench and 𝜏 2-Bench, we used GPT-5.2 11 as a user simulator and evaluate performance by directly comparing the model before and after fine-tuning. • Datasets. The AgentSkiller-11K dataset includes 5,941 single-domain samples representing atomic tasks within isolated boundaries and 5,581 cross-domain samples capturing complex workflows across multiple services. 

5.2. Main Results Competitive Performance Against Proprietary Models. The experimental results presented in Table 1 demonstrate that AgentSkiller-14B establishes a new standard for open-source tool-learning models, achieving performance parity with, and in some cases surpassing, top-tier closed-source systems. On the complex 𝜏 2-bench, which evaluates multi-turn and cross-domain capabilities, AgentSkiller-14B achieves an overall score of 79.1%, significantly outperforming GPT-o3 with 68.4% and Claude-Sonnet-4 at 56.8%. Notably, in the Telecom domain, the model attains a score of 91.2%, securing the second-best position globally and trailing only the much larger GPT-5-think. Furthermore, on ACEBench-Agent, AgentSkiller-14B records a score of 78.0%, surpassing all compared open-source baselines and outperforming Gemini-2.5-pro by a margin of 14.6%. This indicates that high-quality synthetic data can effectively bridge the capability gap between compact open-source models and proprietary giants. 

Efficacy of Cross-Domain Data Synthesis. A comparative analysis between the Single-Domain (SD) subset and the Full Data configuration reveals the critical importance of diverse training trajectories. While the AgentSkiller-SD-14B model performs strongly on ACEBench-Agent with a score of 78.0%, its performance on the more intricate 𝜏 2-bench is limited to 71.2%. The integration of cross-domain data in the Full configuration elevates this score to 79.1%, with the most substantial gains observed in the Retail domain, improving from 69.3% to 77.2%. More strikingly, on the 𝜏 -bench, the transition from SD to Full Set yields a performance leap from 45.4% to 67.2%. This trend suggests that the cross-domain synthesis pipeline not only enhances the model’s ability to handle complex, interleaved tasks but also reinforces its robustness on fundamental tool-use scenarios by exposing the model to a broader distribution of domain environment interaction patterns. 

Parameter Efficiency and Scaling Dynamics The data highlights a compelling trade-off between model scale and data quality. AgentSkiller-4B, despite its compact size, achieves an overall 𝜏 2-bench score of 66.0%, remarkably outperforming the significantly larger xLAM-2-70B-fc-r at 41.0% and Qwen3-Thinking-235B scoring 58.6%. This result challenges the prevailing assumption that complex reasoning requires massive parameter counts, instead pointing to data quality as the governing factor in function-calling proficiency. Additionally, we observe consistent scaling laws within the AgentSkiller family on complex benchmarks. On the Telecom task, performance scales monotonically from 76.6% for the 4B model to 91.2% for the 14B variant, confirming that the proposed data synthesis method provides a stable learning signal that benefits from increased model capacity. 

5.3. Analysis Results Robustness and Consistency Analysis. To further evaluate the stability of model performance under varying success criteria, we analyze the metric on the 𝜏 2-bench, as illustrated in Figure 7. This evaluation pits our AgentSkiller-14B against significantly larger baselines, specifically AgentScaler-30B-A3B and Qwen3-Thinking-30B-A3B. The results reveals a decisive advantage for AgentSkiller-14B across the majority of domains, despite it possessing less than half the parameter count of the competing models. In the Overall and Retail categories, AgentSkiller-14B maintains a distinct performance margin across all values, demonstrating superior consistency. The contrast is most 

> 8https://openai.com/zh-Hans-CN/index/introducing-o3-and-o4-mini/
> 9https://openai.com/zh-Hans-CN/index/gpt-4o-mini-advancing-cost-efficient-intelligence/
> 10 https://openai.com/zh-Hans-CN/index/introducing-gpt-5/
> 11 https://openai.com/zh-Hans-CN/index/introducing-gpt-5-2/

23 Table 1 | Model performance comparison on 𝜏 -bench, 𝜏 2-bench and ACEBench-Agent. The best results are highlighted in bold , and the second-best results are underlined. 

Model 𝜏 -Bench 𝜏 2-Bench ACEBench Retail Airline Overall Retail Airline Telecom Overall Agent Closed-Source Large Language Models 

Gemini-2.5-pro 68.7 44.0 61.2 67.5 56.0 27.2 48.9 63.4 Claude-Sonnet-4 73.9 40.0 63.6 67.5 54.0 47.4 56.8 42.5 GPT-o3 70.4 52.0 64.8 80.2 64.8 58.2 68.4 63.3 GPT-o4-mini 70.4 46.0 63.0 70.2 56.0 46.5 57.9 60.0 GPT-5-think 78.3 44.0 67.8 81.1 62.6 96.7 84.2 32.5 

Open-Source Large Language Models 

GPT-OSS-120B-A5B 67.8 49.2 62.1 57.0 38.0 45.6 48.9 50.8 Deepseek-V3.1-671B-A37B 66.1 40.0 58.1 64.9 46.0 38.5 50.7 40.8 Kimi-K2-1T-A32B 73.9 51.2 67.0 70.6 56.5 65.8 66.1 65.0 Qwen3-Thinking-235B-A22B 67.8 46.0 61.2 71.9 58.0 45.6 58.6 39.1 Seed-OSS-36B 70.4 46.0 63.0 68.4 52.0 41.2 54.3 58.4 Qwen3-Coder-30B-A3B 68.7 48.0 62.4 60.5 42.0 30.7 45.0 24.1 xLAM-2-8B-fc-r 58.2 35.2 51.2 55.3 48.0 11.4 36.0 5.0 xLAM-2-32B-fc-r 64.3 45.0 58.4 55.3 52.0 16.7 38.9 13.4 xLAM-2-70B-fc-r 67.1 45.2 60.4 61.4 56.0 14.0 41.0 38.4 Qwen3-Thinking-4B 59.1 52.5 57.1 56.1 52.0 28.7 44.1 11.7 Qwen3-8B 45.2 25.0 39.0 41.2 30.5 23.5 32.0 29.1 Qwen3-14B 45.7 31.0 41.2 48.0 30.0 26.9 36.1 44.2 Qwen3-Thinking-30B-A3B 67.8 48.0 61.8 58.8 58.0 26.3 45.3 42.8 AgentScaler-4B 64.3 54.0 61.2 62.3 56.0 48.2 55.4 30.8 AgentScaler-8B 50.4 42.0 47.8 58.8 44.0 45.4 50.6 44.2 AgentScaler-30B-A3B 70.4 54.0 65.4 70.2 60.0 55.3 62.3 60.0 ToolMind-8B 57.4 36.0 50.9 59.7 48.0 31.6 46.1 -ToolMind-14B 60.0 46.0 55.7 59.7 56.0 31.6 47.5 -EnvScaler-4B (w/ SFT) 44.4 40.0 43.1 46.5 36.0 23.7 35.3 40.0 EnvScaler-8B (w/ SFT) 48.7 34.0 44.2 43.0 40.0 26.3 35.6 70.0 EnvScaler-14B (w/ SFT) 55.7 26.0 46.6 49.1 42.0 35.7 42.3 64.0 MUA-4B (w/ SFT) 14.8 18.0 15.8 11.4 36.0 21.2 19.8 40.0 MUA-8B (w/ SFT) 43.5 26.0 38.2 47.4 40.0 23.9 36.4 66.0 MUA-14B (w/ SFT) 48.7 36.0 44.8 57.0 42.0 55.3 53.6 70.0 ToolACE-4B 13.0 14.0 13.3 12.3 24.0 20.2 17.6 26.0 ToolACE-8B 27.0 10.0 21.8 38.7 18.0 21.2 27.8 50.0 ToolACE-14B 37.4 22.0 32.7 36.8 24.0 29.8 31.6 52.0 

AgentSkiller (Single-Domain Subset) 

AgentSkiller-SD-4B 47.0 24.0 40.0 52.6 34.0 72.6 57.5 64.0 AgentSkiller-SD-8B 53.9 32.0 47.2 51.3 42.0 61.1 53.6 76.0 AgentSkiller-SD-14B 53.0 28.0 45.4 69.3 44.0 85.1 71.2 78.0 AgentSkiller (Full Set (with Cross-Domain Subset)) 

AgentSkiller-4B 62.6 54.0 60.0 60.6 54.0 76.6 66.0 54.0 AgentSkiller-8B 59.1 36.0 52.1 59.7 46.0 67.0 60.2 68.0 

AgentSkiller-14B 73.0 54.0 67.2 77.2 56.0 91.2 79.1 78.0 

pronounced in the Telecom domain, where AgentSkiller-14B initiates with a success rate near 90% at and maintains a robust lead as increases, whereas the 30B parameter baselines exhibit a sharp performance degradation, starting below 60%. While the performance in the Airline domain remains tightly clustered among all models, the aggregate trends confirm that the high-quality synthetic data generated by our framework imparts a level of execution robustness that outweighs raw model scale. 

Performance Scaling with Interaction Depth. Figure 8 depicts the fine-grained relationship between task execution accuracy and interaction complexity, measured by the number of tool calls, across the 24 1 2 3 4         

> K
> 40
> 50
> 60
> 70
> 80
> Success Rate (%)
> Retail
> AgentScaler-30B-A3B
> Qwen3-Thinking-30B-A3B
> AgentSkiller-14B
> 1234
> K
> 20
> 30
> 40
> 50
> 60
> Success Rate (%)
> Airline
> 1234
> K
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40
> 50
> 60
> 70
> 80
> 90
> Success Rate (%)
> Telecom
> 1234
> K
> 30
> 40
> 50
> 60
> 70
> 80
> Success Rate (%)
> Overall

Figure 7 | Passˆk metric results across all domains in the 𝜏 2-Bench of our AgentSkiller-14B compared with AgentScaler-30B-A3B and Qwen3-Thinking-30B-A3B. 6 8 10 12 14 16               

> Number of Tool Calls
> 0%
> 10%
> 20%
> 30%
> 40%
> 50%
> 60%
> 70%
> 80%
> 90%
> Task Accuracy  60%
> 66%
> 56%
> 63%
> 56%
> 45%
> 49%
> 46%
> 28%
> 60%
> 10%
> Retail
> (ρ = -0.688, p = 0.019)
> 510 15 20 25
> Number of Tool Calls
> 0%
> 10%
> 20%
> 30%
> 40%
> 50%
> 60%
> 70%
> 80%
> 90%
> 60%
> 80%
> 30%
> 44%
> 20%
> 34%
> 40%
> 17%
> 23%
> 40% 40%
> 20%
> 0%
> 40%
> 30%
> 0%
> 20%
> Airline
> (ρ = -0.566, p = 0.018)
> 46810 12 14
> Number of Tool Calls
> 0%
> 10%
> 20%
> 30%
> 40%
> 50%
> 60%
> 70%
> 80%
> 90%
> 47%
> 53%
> 64%
> 55%
> 58%
> 70%
> 58%
> 56%
> 63%
> 67%
> 50%
> Telecom
> (ρ = 0.300, p = 0.370)
> 0510 15 20 25
> Number of Tool Calls
> 0%
> 10%
> 20%
> 30%
> 40%
> 50%
> 60%
> 70%
> 80%
> 90%
> 60%
> 66%
> 56%
> 63%
> 56%
> 45%
> 49%
> 46%
> 28%
> 60%
> 10%
> 60%
> 80%
> 30%
> 44%
> 20%
> 34%
> 40%
> 17%
> 23%
> 40% 40%
> 20%
> 0%
> 40%
> 30%
> 0%
> 20%
> 47%
> 53%
> 64%
> 55%
> 58%
> 70%
> 58%
> 56%
> 63%
> 67%
> 50%
> Combined
> Retail Domain
> Airline Domain
> Telecom Domain
> Retail Trend
> Airline Trend
> Telecom Trend
> Small Sample Size
> Large Sample Size

Figure 8 | Accuracy by tool call count of AgentSkiller-14B across different domains on 𝜏 2-bench. three domains of the 𝜏 2-bench. A distinct divergence in performance trajectories is observed. For the Retail and Airline domains, the model exhibits a statistically significant negative correlation between trajectory length and success rate, with Pearson correlation coefficients 𝜌 of -0.688 at 𝑝 = 0.019 and -0.566 at 𝑝 = 0.018, respectively. Specifically, in the Retail domain, accuracy remains robust above 60% for short-horizon tasks requiring 6-8 tool calls but experiences a precipitous decline to below 20% as the sequence length extends beyond 14 steps. Similarly, the Airline domain shows high initial proficiency reaching 80% at low complexity but suffers from error accumulation in long-horizon scenarios, with accuracy dropping to near zero for tasks requiring more than 20 tool calls. 

Domain-Specific Robustness Profiles. In sharp contrast to the degradation observed in Retail and Airline tasks, the Telecom domain displays an anomalous and resilient performance profile, character-ized by a positive correlation coefficient of 𝜌 = 0.300. Rather than decaying with increased complexity, the model’s accuracy initially ascends, peaking at 70% around 8 tool calls, and maintains a competitive performance level approximately 50-60% even as the interaction depth extends to 12-14 calls. This inverted U-shaped trend suggests that the AgentSkiller-14B model has effectively internalized the complex, multi-step procedural logic inherent to Telecom workflows such as diagnostic troubleshoot-ing or plan modification, where longer tool sequences often represent necessary, deterministic steps rather than improved confusion or error recovery. The combined visualization further highlights this stratification, showing that while Airline tasks present the highest difficulty ceiling at extreme lengths, the model demonstrates exceptional stability in the Telecom domain, resisting the typical trend of long-context performance collapse. 

6. Conclusion 

In this work, we introduced AgentSkiller , a scalable framework for synthesizing high-fidelity, cross-domain executable agent environments. By rigorously enforcing state-machine determinism and logical consistency, AgentSkiller automates the generation of diverse tool-use trajectories that mirror real-world complexity. A pivotal finding of our study is the indispensable role of semantically integrated cross-domain synthesis . Our experiments on the 𝜏 2-bench reveal that single-domain training alone is insufficient for generalist intelligence; it is the fusion of distinct service blueprints 25 into interleaved, long-horizon workflows that effectively unlocks an agent’s ability to handle complex planning and state management. The empirical success of AgentSkiller-14B, which outperforms significantly larger proprietary models, validates a critical paradigm shift: scaling generalist agent capabilities depends less on sheer parameter count and more on the structural depth and logical connectivity of the training data. We hope AgentSkiller serves as a foundational platform for future research in robust, autonomous generalist agents. 

References 

S. Agarwal, L. Ahmad, J. Ai, S. Altman, A. Applebaum, E. Arbus, R. K. Arora, Y. Bai, B. Baker, H. Bao, et al. gpt-oss-120b & gpt-oss-20b model card. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.10925, 2025. V. Barres, H. Dong, S. Ray, X. Si, and K. Narasimhan. 𝑡𝑎𝑢 2-bench: Evaluating conversational agents in a dual-control environment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.07982, 2025. A. R. Cassandra. A survey of pomdp applications. In Working notes of AAAI 1998 fall symposium on planning with partially observable Markov decision processes, volume 1724, 1998. C. Chen, X. Hao, W. Liu, X. Huang, X. Zeng, S. Yu, D. Li, S. Wang, W. Gan, Y. Huang, et al. Acebench: Who wins the match point in tool usage? arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12851, 2025. M. Chen, H. Sun, T. Li, F. Yang, H. Liang, K. Lu, B. Cui, W. Zhang, Z. Zhou, and W. Chen. Facil-itating multi-turn function calling for llms via compositional instruction tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.12952, 2024. G. Comanici, E. Bieber, M. Schaekermann, I. Pasupat, N. Sachdeva, I. Dhillon, M. Blistein, O. Ram, D. Zhang, E. Rosen, et al. Gemini 2.5: Pushing the frontier with advanced reasoning, multimodality, long context, and next generation agentic capabilities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.06261, 2025. A. Eleti, J. Harris, and L. Kilpatrick. Function calling and other api updates, jun 2023. URL https: //openai.com/index/function-calling-and-other-api-updates/ .R. Fang, S. Cai, B. Li, J. Wu, G. Li, W. Yin, X. Wang, X. Wang, L. Su, Z. Zhang, et al. Towards general agentic intelligence via environment scaling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.13311, 2025. S. Kim, S. Moon, R. Tabrizi, N. Lee, M. W. Mahoney, K. Keutzer, and A. Gholami. An llm compiler for parallel function calling. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024. W. Liu, X. Huang, X. Zeng, X. Hao, S. Yu, D. Li, S. Wang, W. Gan, Z. Liu, Y. Yu, et al. Toolace: Winning the points of llm function calling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.00920, 2024a. Z. Liu, T. Hoang, J. Zhang, M. Zhu, T. Lan, J. Tan, W. Yao, Z. Liu, Y. Feng, R. RN, et al. Apigen: Automated pipeline for generating verifiable and diverse function-calling datasets. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:54463–54482, 2024b. Z. Luo, Z. Shen, W. Yang, Z. Zhao, P. Jwalapuram, A. Saha, D. Sahoo, S. Savarese, C. Xiong, and J. Li. Mcp-universe: Benchmarking large language models with real-world model context protocol servers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.14704, 2025. S. G. Patil, H. Mao, F. Yan, C. C.-J. Ji, V. Suresh, I. Stoica, and J. E. Gonzalez. The berkeley function calling leaderboard (bfcl): From tool use to agentic evaluation of large language models. In Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning. A. Prabhakar, Z. Liu, M. Zhu, J. Zhang, T. Awalgaonkar, S. Wang, Z. Liu, H. Chen, T. Hoang, J. C. Niebles, et al. Apigen-mt: Agentic pipeline for multi-turn data generation via simulated agent-human interplay. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.03601, 2025. 26 T. Schick, J. Dwivedi-Yu, R. Dessì, R. Raileanu, M. Lomeli, E. Hambro, L. Zettlemoyer, N. Cancedda, and T. Scialom. Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves to use tools. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:68539–68551, 2023. G. Sheng, C. Zhang, Z. Ye, X. Wu, W. Zhang, R. Zhang, Y. Peng, H. Lin, and C. Wu. Hybridflow: A flexible and efficient rlhf framework. In Proceedings of the Twentieth European Conference on Computer Systems, pages 1279–1297, 2025. D. Silver and R. S. Sutton. Welcome to the era of experience. Google AI, 1, 2025. X. Song, H. Chang, G. Dong, Y. Zhu, Z. Dou, and J.-R. Wen. Envscaler: Scaling tool-interactive environments for llm agent via programmatic synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.05808, 2026. K. Team, Y. Bai, Y. Bao, G. Chen, J. Chen, N. Chen, R. Chen, Y. Chen, Y. Chen, Y. Chen, et al. Kimi k2: Open agentic intelligence. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.20534, 2025. Z. Wang, Q. Chang, H. Patel, S. Biju, C.-E. Wu, Q. Liu, A. Ding, A. Rezazadeh, A. Shah, Y. Bao, et al. Mcp-bench: Benchmarking tool-using llm agents with complex real-world tasks via mcp servers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.20453, 2025. J. Wu, B. Li, R. Fang, W. Yin, L. Zhang, Z. Tao, D. Zhang, Z. Xi, G. Fu, Y. Jiang, et al. Webdancer: Towards autonomous information seeking agency. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.22648, 2025. A. Yang, A. Li, B. Yang, B. Zhang, B. Hui, B. Zheng, B. Yu, C. Gao, C. Huang, C. Lv, et al. Qwen3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09388, 2025a. C. Yang, R. Le, Y. Xing, Z. An, Z. Chen, W. X. Zhao, Y. Song, and T. Zhang. Toolmind technical report: A large-scale, reasoning-enhanced tool-use dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.15718, 2025b. S. Yao, J. Zhao, D. Yu, N. Du, I. Shafran, K. R. Narasimhan, and Y. Cao. React: Synergizing rea-soning and acting in language models. In The eleventh international conference on learning representations, 2022. S. Yao, N. Shinn, P. Razavi, and K. Narasimhan. 𝑡𝑎𝑢 -bench: A benchmark for tool-agent-user interaction in real-world domains. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.12045, 2024. F. Yin, Z. Wang, I.-H. Hsu, J. Yan, K. Jiang, Y. Chen, J. Gu, L. Le, K.-W. Chang, C.-Y. Lee, et al. Magnet: Multi-turn tool-use data synthesis and distillation via graph translation. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 32600–32616, 2025. W. Zhao, X. Wang, C. Ma, L. Kong, Z. Yang, M. Tuo, X. Shi, Y. Zhai, and X. Cai. Mua-rl: Multi-turn user-interacting agent reinforcement learning for agentic tool use. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.18669, 2025. 27 Appendix A. Tool Graph Visualization 

Figure 9 visualizes the structural diversity of generated Tool Graphs. Each graph is anchored by an orange root Auth Entry node establishing user identity and initial state. The topology expands into a DAG of gray Tool Call nodes governed by three edge types. Red solid lines denote state depen-dencies enforcing execution prerequisites, such as requiring create_clin_doc_record to precede 

link_doc_to_patient in Care Messenger . Green dashed lines represent information flow, handling dynamic parameter passing like patient_id across actions. Finally, black dotted lines indicate storyline flow, modeling probabilistic transitions to introduce realistic noise and non-deterministic branching. The structural variation, ranging from shallow, broad trees in Carbon Impact Co-Benefit to deep, intertwined chains in Lease Lifecycle Server , confirms the framework’s ability to autonomously construct complex, domain-specific execution logic. Carbon Impact Co Benefit Server 

list donor 

projects 

verify 

project 

exists 

verify 

donor 

exists 

verify 

sensor 

exists 

match 

sensors to 

donor.. 

update 

donor 

sensor.. 

check 

sensor 

calibrat.. 

update 

donor 

project.. 

delete 

donor 

sensor.. 

list donor 

sensors 

filter 

projects 

by.. 

map sensor 

to country 

delete 

donor 

project.. 

get 

supported 

pollutan.. compute 

donor co 

benefit.. 

auth donor 

Care Messenger 

list 

messages 

with clin 

verify 

assign 

create 

assign with 

clin 

send message 

to clin 

mark message 

read 

deactiv 

assign 

create clin 

doc record 

list patient 

docs 

link doc to 

patient 

get active 

assigns 

auth patient 

revoke doc 

link 

attach doc 

to message 

find clin by 

email 

Clinical Documentation Workflow 

generate 

handoff 

summary 

add 

authorship 

record 

assign 

patient to 

clin 

auth clin 

end patient 

assign 

sign doc 

amend doc 

version 

start doc 

for patient 

route doc to 

clin 

list 

assigned 

patients 

retire doc 

list docs 

for patient 

Course Compass 

check course 

eligibility 

drop course 

list active 

courses 

auth student 

get instr 

contact info 

cancel 

appointment 

schedule 

appointment 

get course 

details 

list my 

enrollments 

request 

enrollment 

reschedule 

appointment 

send message 

to instr 

list my 

appointments 

Culinary Class Composer 

remove menu 

plan item 

define 

recipe 

ingredient.. check 

session 

allergens 

link recipe 

to menuitem 

for session 

update menu 

plan 

servings 

list active 

recipes 

unlink 

recipe from 

menuitem 

create menu 

plan for 

session 

get session 

menu summary 

auth instr 

list instr 

sessions 

list avail 

menu items 

compute 

session 

procuremen.. 

update 

ingredient 

spec amount 

Customs Declaration Helper 

create 

declaration 

item mapping 

list avail 

datasets 

auth 

passenger 

use tariff 

preference 

estimate 

duty for 

declaration 

list 

passenger 

declarations 

submit 

declaration 

request 

dataset 

access 

check 

dataset 

access revoke 

dataset 

access 

update 

declaration 

item values 

Device Provisioning Hub 

update sim 

provision 

status 

update 

device 

assign.. 

add device 

assign 

query 

device 

assigns 

add sim 

provision 

get mobile 

device 

details 

list 

assigned 

devices.. 

record 

compliance 

audit 

remove sim 

provision 

query sim 

provisions 

get driver 

profile 

auth 

driver 

remove 

device 

assign 

verify 

device os 

compliance 

get 

simcard 

details 

check 

driver 

license.. 

Device Therapy Monitoring Server 

update 

patient 

assign.. 

list 

overseen 

devices 

update 

pairing 

status 

check 

calibration 

due 

get active 

therapy 

pairings 

get latest 

maint event 

assign 

patient to 

clin 

stream 

device 

status 

auth clin 

log device 

alarm 

register 

device 

oversight 

get clin 

profile 

update 

device 

status 

list 

assigned 

patients 

pair device 

to patient 

for therapy 

Driver Expense Reconciliation 

mark expense 

posted 

query driver 

postings 

link payment 

card to 

driver 

capture card 

transaction 

create 

ledger 

posting fr.. 

revoke 

payment card 

assign 

list driver 

payment 

cards 

request 

reimbursement 

for posting 

auth driver 

query driver 

expenses 

categorize 

expense get default 

ledger 

account by.. 

check 

payment card 

status 

EV Training Lab Coordinator 

cancel 

vehicle 

reservation 

cancel 

station 

booking 

create 

chargingstation 

booking 

cancel 

training 

session 

verify 

connector 

support 

create 

vehicle 

reservation 

check 

vehicle 

avail 

list 

active 

charging.. 

get 

schedule 

conflicts 

list 

station 

bookings 

list 

vehicle 

reservations 

check 

station 

avail 

update 

training 

session.. 

get instr 

profile 

auth instr schedule 

training 

charge.. 

list 

training 

sessions 

list 

active 

vehicles 

Immunization Tracker 

generate 

shareable 

immun record 

verify doc 

for patient 

get vaccine 

info 

add immun 

event 

revoke 

patient doc 

link 

create 

patient doc 

link 

create 

vaccine plan 

update immun 

event doc 

list 

upcoming 

doses 

auth patient 

search docs 

by patient 

cancel 

vaccine plan 

list patient 

immun 

history 

get vaccine 

series recom 

Lease Lifecycle Server 

update 

unit 

status 

request 

unit 

transfer 

check unit 

avail schedule 

move out 

schedule 

move in 

request 

move out 

renew 

lease 

get lease 

details 

create 

lease 

agreement 

execute 

unit 

transfer 

list 

vacant 

units by.. 

cancel 

change 

request 

auth 

tenant get tenant 

profile 

get active 

leases for 

tenant 

request 

move in 

State Dependency Information Flow Storyline Flow Auth Entry Tool Call 

Figure 9 | Case studies of Tool Graph visualization across different domains. 28 B. Core Prompts 

Blueprint Generation Prompt 

You are implementing a detailed MCP server blueprint based on the given outline. <outline> Server Name: {server_name} Description: {description} Entities: {entities} </outline> <entity_definitions> {entity_definitions} </entity_definitions> ---### Step by Step Generation 1. The core entity (first in the list) is the user interacting with the LLM agent. 2. Design relationships between the entities. - All entities and relationships are physically implemented as dataframes. - Relationships’ attributes are columns of inter-entity interaction dataframe. - Relationship should have its own ID, NOT reference other relationships’ IDs. - The core entity must be involved in all relationships. In other words, relationship that ONLY involves peripheral entities and not involve the core entity is NOT allowed. - Relationship attributes should ONLY reference entity attributes as foreign keys, NOT other relationships’ keys. Each relationship connects entities directly (e.g., a relationship can have student_id and course_id, but should NOT have enrollment_id pointing to another relationship). 3. Design functions that operate the relationship dataframe (query records, add record , update record, etc). 4. Design auxiliary functions that complete the MCP server functionality. - For example, ‘list_all_courses()‘ in a ‘CourseManagement‘ MCP server. ### Requirements - Only up to {max_relationships} relationships are allowed between two entities. - The MCP server should include at least {min_functions} functions. - Function parameters should NOT assume relationships or entities that do not exist. - An authorization function (only one) is needed to authorize the user (core entity) with its ID at the beginning. The authorization function should ONLY return Success/Failed status, NOT return any tokens (e.g., auth_token). The session context will manage authentication state internally. - You are NOT allowed to add new attributes to entities. - You are NOT allowed to add new entities beyond those specified. - There should be dependencies among functions to increase interaction complexity: - Input parameters of core functions should rely on outputs of other relevant functions. - For example, before enrolling a Student to a Course, check prerequisites first. ### Output Format Return your answer in JSON format: ‘‘‘json {{ "MCP_server_name": "{server_name}", "description": "{description}", "core_entity": "{core_entity}", "peripheral_entities": {peripheral_entities_json}, "relationships": [ {{ "name": "", "description": "", "attributes": {{ 

29 "attr_name": {{ "type": "", "value_from_entity": "", "range": "" }} }} }} ], "functions": [ {{ "name": "", "description": "", "legal_accessor": [], "parameters": {{ "param_name": {{ "description": "", "type": "", "range": "" }} }} }} ]}} Output only the JSON object, no additional text. 

Tool-Graph Generation Prompt 

You are an expert in reasoning about tool dependencies in modular agent systems. Given a set of tool descriptions for {domain_name}, <tools> {tools} </tools> and the policy of the system <policy> {policy} </policy> your task is to construct a **Tool Execution Graph**. ### Guidelines 1. Each node represents one tool function. 2. Each edge represents an **execution dependency**. 3. Use directed edges (‘"source" -> "target"‘) for: - **State Dependencies** (e.g., authentication, record retrieval) - **Information Flow** (output of one tool is required by another) - **Storyline Flow** (a tool is usually followed by another tool in real-world scenario). 4. Never omit the nodes list -- ensure every mentioned tool exists as a node. 5. **Single Source of Truth:** The node ‘Authorize‘ must be the **ONLY** node with an In-Degree of 0. It is the starting point of the entire workflow. 6. **Full Connectivity:** Every node (except ‘Authorize‘) must have at least one incoming edge (In-Degree >= 1). This ensures all nodes are reachable from ‘ Authorize‘. 7. **Acyclicity:** The graph must strictly be a DAG. No circular dependencies (e.g., A ->B->A is forbidden). 8. **Storyline Flow:** Consider this connection ONLY when the full connectivity constraint CANNOT be satisfied by the other two types of dependencies. 8. The output must be valid JSON that can be loaded by networkx. 

30 9. Output JSON in the following schema without any extra explanations. ‘‘‘json {{ "directed": true, "multigraph": false, "nodes": [ {{"id": "tool_name"}}, ... ], "links": [ {{"source": "tool_a", "target": "tool_b", "type": "state dependency"}}, {{"source": "tool_a", "target": "tool_c", "type": "information flow"}}, {{"source": "tool_a", "target": "tool_d", "type": "storyline flow"}}, ... ]}} ‘‘‘ 

MCP Server Implementation Instruction 

You must implement an MCP server as a complete Python module. Produce the complete MCP server implementation according to the domain policy, database blueprint, MCP server code template, and the behavioral constraints described as follows. ===================== ## 0. Inputs ===================== ### 0.1 Domain Policy {domain_policy} ### 0.2 MCP Server Blueprint {blueprint} ### 0.3 MCP Server Code Template {mcp_server_code_template} ===================== ## 1. Implementation Target ===================== Generate a Python file containing: - A session context @dataclass - Session state management - Session database isolation (independent database per session_id) - A full MCP server class - All tools implemented as class methods - A unified router entrypoint: invoke(session_id, tool_name, **kwargs) - ’session_id’ helps you find the session context and database copies - ’tool_name’ is the tool you would like to call - ’**kwargs’ are the parameters of the tool you would like to call - Domain-policy violation checking - All "xx_id" must satisfy {{entity_name.lower()}}\_id. ### 1.1 Interface The implemented MCP server must be compatible with the standard wrapper interface. ### 1.2 Load Database Get database root by 

31 ’’’python script_dir = os.path.dirname(os.path.abspath(__file__)) db_root = os.path.abspath(os.path.join(script_dir, ’..’, ’database’, ’outputs’)) ’’’ **NOTE** - ’__init__(self, domain_name)’ should call ’_load_database(domain_name)’ during initialization. - Never mock new databases instead of reading from the given files. - The current time is {simulation_time}. ### 1.3 Output Rules - All tools must return JSON-serializable Python objects - No printing - No placeholder methods ===================== ## 2. CRITICAL IMPLEMENTATION RULES ===================== ### 2.1 Confirmation Pattern (REQUIRED for data-changing functions) If the policy mentions that a function requires "user confirmation" before execution: - Add a ’confirm: bool = False’ parameter to the function - When ’confirm=False’: Return a preview of what will happen with ’{{" needs_confirmation": True, "action_preview": "...description..."}}’ - When ’confirm=True’: Execute the actual action and return the result - The LLM Assistant will first call with confirm=False, show the preview to user, then call again with confirm=True after user says "yes" ### 2.2 Accept Extra Parameters (REQUIRED for ALL functions) Every function MUST accept ’**kwargs’ as the last parameter to gracefully ignore unexpected parameters. ### 2.3 Core Entity ID Handling - Authorization binds the core entity ID to the session - After authorization, functions should use ’session.authorized_{{core_entity}}_id’ instead of requiring it as a parameter ===================== ## 3. Output Constraints ===================== 1. Do NOT include unit tests. 2. The final output must be valid Python code (no markdown). 3. All imports must be included. 4. The module must execute without modification. 5. EVERY function must end with ’**kwargs’ in its signature. 6. Data-changing functions MUST implement the confirm pattern if policy requires confirmation. Output only the Python code, no markdown formatting. 

MCP Server Error Tracing Prompt 

I’m building an MCP server following the policy below <policy> {policy} </policy> Here is the current implementation: ’’’python 

32 {mcp_server_code} ’’’ Such code failed in the following unit test: <unit_test_failure> {unit_test_failure} </unit_test_failure> The test data generator: <test_data_generator> {test_data_generator} </test_data_generator> ## Task Identify the reason that caused the failure: - Is it because of wrong implementation of the MCP server? - Is it simply a wrong unit test? - Is it related to improper test data selection? IMPORTANT: You MUST respond with ONLY a valid JSON object. No additional text before or after. ’’’json {{ "failed_test_name": "<exact test function name>", "likely_bug_location": "<one of: function | unit test | test data>", "explanation": "<brief explanation of what’s wrong>" }} ’’’ Respond with ONLY the JSON object above, nothing else. 

33