Title: On Emergent Social World Models -- Evidence for Functional Integration of Theory of Mind and Pragmatic Reasoning in Language Models

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2602.10298v1

Published Time: Thu, 12 Feb 2026 01:20:14 GMT

Number of Pages: 29

Markdown Content:
# On Emergent Social World Models — Evidence for Functional Integration of Theory of Mind and Pragmatic Reasoning in Language Models 

Polina Tsvilodub ∗ and Jan-Felix Klumpp and Amir Mohammadpour 

Department of Linguistics University of Tübingen 

> ∗

polina.tsvilodub@uni-tuebingen.de 

Jennifer Hu 

Department of Cognitive Science Johns Hopkins University 

Michael Franke 

Department of Linguistics University of Tübingen 

Abstract 

This paper investigates whether LMs recruit shared computational mechanisms for general Theory of Mind (ToM) and language-specific pragmatic reasoning in order to contribute to the general question of whether LMs may be said to have emergent “social world models,” i.e., representations of mental states that are repurposed across tasks (the functional inte-gration hypothesis ). Using behavioral eval-uations and causal-mechanistic experiments via functional localization methods inspired by cognitive neuroscience, we analyze LMs’ per-formance across seven subcategories of ToM abilities (Beaudoin et al., 2020) on a sub-stantially larger localizer dataset than used in prior like-minded work. Results from stringent hypothesis-driven statistical testing offer sug-gestive evidence for the functional integration hypothesis, indicating that LMs may develop interconnected “social world models” rather than isolated competencies. This work con-tributes novel ToM localizer data, methodolog-ical refinements to functional localization tech-niques, and empirical insights into the emer-gence of social cognition in artificial systems. 

1 Introduction 

Large language models (LMs) possess astonish-ing abilities and prove useful for a plethora of downstream tasks, but controversy persists regard-ing how to conceptualize their capacities. Some view LMs as mere “stochastic parrots,” fundamen-tally incapable of genuine understanding (Bender and Koller, 2020; Bender et al., 2021). Others ar-gue that highly proficient language ability presup-poses the emergence of “world models,” i.e., rep-resentations of (relevant aspects) of the language-generating processes (Yudkowsky, 2023; Bereska and Gavves, 2024). Arguments for latter view typ-ically come from models optimized for solving finite-state problems like Chess (Toshniwal et al., 2022), Othello (Li et al., 2023), or taxi navigation (Vafa et al., 2024), or from narrow domains like text-based adventure games (Li et al., 2021). This paper contributes to the debate by investigating the extent to which large pretrained LMs recruit repre-sentations and computational mechanisms sugges-tive of “world models” for tasks crucial for general-purpose language understanding. Language understanding comprises formal and 

functional abilities (Mahowald et al., 2024). For-mal abilities (e.g., syntax) may be acquired rela-tively straightforwardly from local statistical pat-terns in training data. Functional abilities relate to language use, e.g., pragmatic reasoning , such as comprehension of contextual meaning and so-cial implications of utterances (Levinson, 1983). Functional ability seems more difficult to extract from text alone, since the surface language signal provides less direct information about relevant la-tent variables, such as interlocutors’ mental states. This raises the issue: to what extent LMs develop rich “social world models”—entertaining concepts of self and other, social commitment, and nested beliefs—in order to achieve their observed level of performance? We here address this big-picture question with a concrete case study on the rela-tionship between LMs’ capacities for (i) Theory of Mind reasoning and (ii) pragmatic reasoning. Theory of Mind (ToM) refers to the capability to attribute mental states—unobservable, latent prop-erties such as beliefs or desires—to oneself and other agents, and plays a fundamental role in social cognition, enabling individuals to interpret others’ behavior as causally driven by these mental states (Wimmer and Perner, 1983; Beaudoin et al., 2020). A longstanding tradition in philosophy, linguistics, and cognitive science conceptualizes linguistic be-havior as a specialized form of goal-directed action (Grice, 1975), such that understanding language is, in principle, structurally similar to interpreting non-linguistic actions. Indeed, evidence from cognitive neuroscience indicates that overlapping neural sub-1

> arXiv:2602.10298v1 [cs.CL] 10 Feb 2026

strates support both Theory of Mind and pragmatic reasoning (Saxe and Kanwisher, 2003; Bosco et al., 2017; Hauptman et al., 2023). What holds for human cognition need not, of course, generalize to LMs. Nothing in their archi-tecture explicitly enforces structural similarity to human solutions for functional language abilities. Nevertheless, if shared computational principles govern linguistic and non-linguistic social reason-ing in humans, efficient compression principles might favor cross-purposing internal mechanisms across these domains in stochastic learners as well. We therefore formulate two contrasting hypotheses. The functional specialization hypothesis holds that LMs use different computational mechanisms for pragmatic and ToM-reasoning. In contrast, the 

functional integration hypothesis maintains that computational mechanisms for pragmatic and ToM-reasoning are shared, at least in substantial part. This dichotomy structures our investigation, even if itis a simplification in several respects. The repurposing of computational mechanisms likely exists along a continuum rather than as a binary dis-tinction, and the constructed domains of pragmatic and ToM-reasoning may themselves lack internal homogeneity. To acknowledge this general ques-tion of the level of granularity at which function sharing should be investigated, we build on recent like-minded work (Ma et al., 2023) and investigate LMs’ ToM capabilities while taking into account the ATOMS framework, short for “Aspects in The-ory Of Mind Space,” which identifies seven sub-categories in ToM abilities (Beaudoin et al., 2020) (described in more detail in Appendix A.1). We explore evidence from behavioral evalua-tions and causal-mechanistic experiments (Sec-tions 2 & 3 respectively). The latter builds on recent work by AlKhamissi et al. (2025a) on func-tional localization inspired from cognitive neuro-science (cf., Duan et al., 2025; Hanna et al., 2025). While this work did not find strong evidence for functional ToM localization based on a very small data set, we do find causal evidence for it based on a much larger data set which is part of this paper’s contribution, as is a more thorough investigation of the method of functional localization in LMs itself. Our paper contributes to related work sepa-rately focusing on ToM and linguistic abilities, in the domain of mechanistic interpretability of LMs (Wang et al., 2022), in particular their language capabilities (Oh et al., 2025) and mental state repre-sentations (Bortoletto et al., 2024; Zhu et al., 2024), and to the growing number of behavioral evalua-tions of LMs’ ToM and pragmatic abilities (which, in part, provided mixed results; e.g., Hu et al., 2023; Ullman, 2023; Sap et al., 2022; Ma et al., 2025). While the functional connection of these two abil-ities has been addressed more in human research (Baldwin and Saylor, 2005; Hauptman et al., 2023), work on the functional organization of LMs has mostly focused on aligning only LMs’ language representations to human brains (Tuckute et al., 2024; AlKhamissi et al., 2025b). We follow re-cent arguments for more integrated investigations of linguistic abilities of LMs grounded in cognitive science approaches (Sumers et al., 2023; McCoy et al., 2024). In sum, this paper contributes behav-ioral and causal-mechanistic experiments, paired with stringent hypothesis-driven statistical testing, that provide suggestive evidence in favor of the functional integration view, thus contributing to the question of emergent social world models. In doing so, the paper contributes novel, empirically grounded ToM localizer data and methodological refinements of the functional localization method. 1

2 Behavioral Evaluation 

According to the functional integration hypothesis, if ToM and pragmatic reasoning share computa-tional resources, we expect a systematic relation between performance on these tasks across differ-ent LMs, which we operationalize in three predic-tions to be tested by statistical analyses: 

P1 (simple correlation): Across LMs, accura-cies on ToM and pragmatic reasoning are pos-itively correlated. 

P2 (predictive redundancy) : Under appropriate controls, when predicting accuracy for a task, information about whether a task is a prag-matic or a ToM reasoning task is not relevant for predicting an LMs’ accuracy for it. 

P3 (predictive gains) : Under appropriate con-trols, information on an LM’s ToM accuracy is better for predicting its pragmatic accuracy than information on general language ability. 

2.1 Datasets 

We select 16 datasets testing ten different pragmatic phenomena from extant pragmatics benchmarks (Ma et al., 2025), and 22 datasets from existing ToM benchmarks. We expand upon fine-grained 

> 1We release all code and data at [redacted for reviewing].

2Figure 1: Average accuracy of 48 models on ToM (x-axis) and pragmatics (y-axis) tasks. 

annotations of ToM benchmarks introduced by Ma et al. (2023) for more ToM datasets, who annotate LM benchmarks with ATOMS identified by Beau-doin et al. (2020) that the benchmarks likely test. The detailed list of datasets and annotations can be found in Appendix A. All datasets have a multiple-choice format: for each item x, given a context c

that contains the target vignette, a question, and optionally instructions or the answer options, there are 2 ≤ n ≤ 6 answer options, one of which is the correct answer that is consistent with ToM-based or pragmatic reasoning. The full prompts for each dataset are reported in Appendix A.3. For evaluat-ing general language ability the BLiMP dataset is used (Warstadt et al., 2020). 

2.2 Models & Procedure 

We test 48 open-source LMs from seven families (Llama, Qwen, Falcon, Mistral, OLMo, Pythia, Gemma), ranging from 0.5B to 72B parameters (Appendix A.4). Where possible, we test base and fine-tuned versions, the type of which (instruction-tuning, RLHF, both) depends on the model. LMs’ predictions are retrieved via conditional log-probability scoring. For each item, we retrieve the log-probability of the tokens of each answer option, conditioned on the input prompt, and av-erage across the token log-probabilities to correct for different lengths of different answer options. The model’s prediction is the option with the high-est normalized log-probability. Accuracy is the proportion of correct answers. 

2.3 Results 

Figure 1 shows the correlation between models’ ac-curacy on pragmatic and ToM benchmarks. As per prediction P1, we find a moderate but significant positive correlation ( r = 0 .68 , p = 1 .24 · 10 −7). To address prediction P2 and explore models’ performance more closely, we fit a Bayesian beta regression model in R using the brms package (Bürkner, 2017), regressing the average accuracy of each model on each dataset against the main effects of model family (seven levels), model size (where models up to 8B parameters were labeled as small, up to 32B as medium, and up to 72B as large), model type (base vs. fine-tuned), dataset type (whether instruction or answer options were in context) and domain (ToM vs. pragmatics), an interaction between model size and type, and ran-dom by-dataset intercepts. 2 Here and below, we report posterior means and 95% credible intervals for the posterior of contrasts of interest. All inde-pendent variables were sum-coded. In line with most evaluations in the literature, we found that, across domains, fine-tuned models performed credi-bly better than base models ( β = 0 .11[0 .05 , 0.16] ), large models performed better than medium mod-els ( β = 0.20 [0 .11 , 0.29] ) and medium mod-els performed better than small models ( β =0.26[0 .20 , 0.32] ). We found no differences be-tween the dataset types ( β = −0.06[ −0.88 , 0.73] ). Crucially, in line with prediction P2, we also found no difference between the domains ToM and prag-matics ( β = −0.03[ −0.74 , 0.67] ), suggesting that the information about the domain of a given task is not crucial for predicting a given model’s accuracy if sufficient information about the model is given. Further accuracy results on the single datasets are in the Appendix (Figure 5 and Figure 6). Finally, we address P3 with model comparison for two Bayesian beta regression models predict-ing the average accuracy on pragmatics datasets for each model against the baseline predictors of model size and model type. 3 One model (M0) con-tains the additional predictor of the model’s aver-age accuracy on the syntax benchmark. The other model (M1) contains information of the model’s accuracy on ToM tasks. Comparing M0 and M1 via leave-one-out cross-validation (LOO-CV), we find that model M1 was significantly better than M0 (ELP D = −16 .8, p -value = 0 ), thus supporting   

> 2The regression model in R syntax: accuracy ∼
> model_family + size * model_type + ds_type + domain + (1 | dataset) . A model with full interaction structure did not converge.
> 3Including the model family fixed effect led to convergence issues.

3prediction P3. Conjointly, these behavioral results provide mod-est indirect evidence for the functional integration hypothesis. But to explore potential diversity in ToM reasoning further, we also ask whether there are more specific aspects of the ToM capabili-ties that LMs perform particularly well on. We operationalize this question through our annota-tions of the evaluation datasets with the ATOMS framework (Beaudoin et al., 2020). We compare the baseline beta regression model (MB) where a model’s average accuracy on ToM evaluation datasets is regressed against the model family, size, type and dataset type, to models which ad-ditionally include all possible combinations of the seven ATOMS main effects (belief, desire, inten-tion, knowledge, non-literal communication, emo-tion, percepts), resulting in 128 different regres-sion models. Comparison was also conducted via LOO-CV. We found that the baseline MB was nu-merically worse than any model with ATOMS pre-dictors. The best model additionally contained the aspects intentions, desires, emotions, percepts and non-literal communication. The difference between MB and the best model was significant (ELP D = −58 .80 p-value = 0 ; full results are in the Appendix, Figure 7). Model comparison fur-ther suggests that several models are on par with the best model, and several models next to MB are clearly worse than others. The least performing models do not contain the predictor percepts, while containing up to three additional other ATOMS predictors. This suggests that the factor percepts added the most predictive power to the statistical models of the LMs’ accuracy, specifically distin-guishing datasets which tapped into this ToM as-pect (datasets containing false-belief tasks about the location of an object and tasks about agent prop-erties) from other evaluation datasets. 

3 Functional Localization 

Functional subnetwork localization is a method that has been widely used in cognitive neuroscience to identify regions in the human brain that are im-plied in the execution of a particular task or abil-ity, including Theory of Mind (e.g., Saxe et al., 2006; Fedorenko et al., 2010), and indeed Haupt-man et al. (2023) suggests that pragmatic language use in humans relies on the same ToM subnetwork. The procedure uses so-called localizer suites that contrast a target condition which contains stimuli that require the capacity of interest for processing, against a closely matched control condition which does not require it. For example, the ToM net-work has been localized by contrasting stories in which an actor holds a false belief (Baron-Cohen et al., 1985) against stories about pictures contain-ing false information (Zaitchik, 1990). While read-ing these stories, the brain activity of human par-ticipants is recorded and localization proceeds via by-individual identification of regions that are se-lectively active under the target, but not under the control stimuli. For our localizations, we build on recent work extending this procedure to language models (AlKhamissi et al., 2025a). However, given that ToM may itself not be a single monolithic ca-pability (see Section 1), cognitive neuroscience has also used other localizers than false belief tasks, e.g., economic games or stories involving moral intent, which have been found to activate the same functional brain region in humans. 

3.1 Localizer Suites 

A localizer suite L comprises a set of sets of tar-get stimuli {S(j) 

> T

}1≤j≤nj and a set of sets of con-trol stimuli {S(k) 

> C

}1≤k≤nk . Localizer suites with 

nj = nk = 1 are called simple . We created four localizer suites based on extant experimental mate-rial which was successful in previous fMRI studies for singling out the ToM network in human brains. Prior studies were selected for variety and to cover all of the seven top-level categories of the ATOMS framework, while still sticking with empirically validated material: 4 The LatentBeliefs suite covers the commonly used false-belief items (Saxe and Kanwisher, 2003), CommunicativeIntent looks at mental state ascriptions in communication, and so might be particularly relevant for comparison to pragmatic reasoning (Bosco et al., 2017), Game-Beliefs considers ToM reasoning in the context of economic games (trust & ultimatum; Chang et al., 2023), and MoralIntent considers issues of respon-sibility in decision making (Young et al., 2007). Localizer suites contained different numbers of tar-get and control sets (see Table 1 for overview and examples). The two simple suites (GameBeliefs and MoralIntent) have target and control sets in which items are exactly paired. To mitigate data 

> 4For example, belief and percepts are relevant for the La-tentBelief suite, intentions and knowledge are relevant for the MoralIntent suite, desires and emotions are relevant for the GameBelief suite, and the CommunicativeIntent suite ad-dresses non-literal communication.

4LatentBeliefs (Saxe and Kanwisher, 2003) FalseBelief (trgt) Tom dropped his keys in the bowl by the door before going for a run. While he was out, Mia put the keys into the desk drawer to tidy up. Tom came back a bit later. S / Q: Tom will first look for his keys in the ( • bowl • drawer) Desire (trgt) Coach Ramirez booked the soccer field for Saturday practice. He told the team they’d be outside unless lightning forced them into the gym. A storm never came, and they kept the plan. S / Q: The coach wanted to practice (• indoors • outdoors) FalsePhoto (ctrl) A bus schedule was printed last month. Yesterday the transit agency changed Route 9 to depart an hour later. All the old paper schedules are still circulating. S / Q: On the printed schedule, Route 9 departs ( • earlier • later) 

GameBeliefs (Chang et al., 2023) GameBelief (trgt) Nora and Ben play an Ultimatum Game. Nora is the proposer and receives 20 Euros to divide between her and another player. She intends to offer half to Ben, but a glitch records her offer as 1 Euro. Ben sees 1 Euro on his screen, frowns, and rejects immediately. S / Q: Ben evidently believes that (• Nora is trying to cheat him • a glitch reduced the offer) GameOutcome (ctrl) Nora and Ben play an Ultimatum Game. Nora is the proposer and receives 20 Euros to divide between her and another player. She intends to offer half to Ben, but a glitch records her offer as 1 Euro. Ben sees 1 Euro on his screen, frowns, and rejects immediately. S / Q: Ben will now have ( • 1 Euro • 0 Euro )

> Table 1: Example synthetic stimuli for five conditions from two localizer suites. Dots indicate answer options. “S / Q:” stands for “Statement / question:” used in the prompts. Examples for all suites are in the appendix, Table 3.

contamination and to control for irrelevant surface-level variation in the localizer materials that may affect LMs more than humans (e.g., differences in semantic content of target vs. control stimuli), we used GPT-5 (which is not evaluated in this study) with a 5-shot in-context prompt to generate 100 novel synthetic stimuli for each dataset in each con-dition (see Appendix B for prompts used). All our items ended in a task question, which would require a human participant to engage in Theory of Mind reasoning in the target stimuli. More information about the data is given in Appendix C, with details on prompt formatting in Section C.2. 

3.2 Localization Procedure in LMs 

For an autoregressive transformer model with a hidden dimension d, let al,t ∈ Rd be the output vector of each transformer block of the l-th layer at token t of the input sequence (target or con-trol stimulus). We record the outputs of each unit 

i ∈ { 1, . . . , d }, which we call activations : al,t,i .To represent activations for the entire stimulus, we use activation at the last token before the model is required to produce the answer. Given a localizer dataset with a set of target stimuli ST and a set of 

control stimuli SC , we generate two sets of activa-tions for every unit (l, i ). We identify functional subnetworks based on relative differences in acti-vation for ST in contrast to SC , as measured by an unpaired or paired Welch’s t-test (the latter used for the simple suites GameBelief and MoralIntent). We write T (i, S T , S C ) for the t-test statistic when comparing activations at unit i for target stimuli in 

ST and control stimuli in SC .We use two statistical approaches for local-ization. The simple approach defines a met-ric for unit i under localizer L as mLi =

T



i, S 

> j

S(j) 

> T

, S 

> k

S(k)

> C



, i.e., the relevant t-test statistic for the union of all target and control items. We add to this a stricter conjunctive approach, which is common in cognitive neuroscience and uses so-called minimum statistic approach (Nichols et al., 2005) to detect significant differences be-tween any pair of relevant target and control items. This metric for unit i and suite L selects the low-est t-statistic for all pairwise comparisons: mLi =min j,k T



i, S (j) 

> T

, S (k)

> C



. For simple suites, the conjunctive approach reduces to the simple. Based on localizer L, we select the subnetwork of units i, such that mi is statistically significant at the significance level α = 0 .05 (modulo appropri-5ate controlling for multiple comparisons). If that set comprises more than 1% of all units, we restrict the selection to the top 1% of units with the highest unique absolute measure |mi|. For each localizer, we also construct a control condition based on the 

least active subnetwork by selecting the same num-ber of units with the smallest absolute |min i|-value from the subset of units whose min i is not signif-icant. To investigate the causal role of the subnet-works through ablation experiments (Section 3.5), units in the subnetwork are set to zero. Altogether, we consider eight localizers for iden-tifying relevant subnetworks for subsequent analy-ses. We have five simple localizers , four of which are obtained from each of the the four localizer suites, and another one from the union of all con-trol and target sets from all localizer suites (the all 

localizer). We consider three conjunctive localiz-ers , two of which come from the LatentBeliefs and the CommunicativeIntent suites. A third conjunc-tive localizer was constructed from the union of these two suites (the LB + CI localizer), as they have non-paired stimuli and were considered to be most relevant for pragmatic reasoning. 

3.3 Models and Evaluation Datasets 

We run localization experiments on language mod-els from four families: Qwen-2.5, Llama, Falcon-3 and Gemma-2, where both base and fine-tuned models are available (20 models in total). The models were selected among the models evaluated behaviorally (see Section 2.2) to cover a wide range of sizes, while generally performing above chance on ToM and pragmatics. To assess the role of the localized subnetworks for the performance on these domains, for each of the 20 models we selected 19 to 24 datasets on which the model performed above chance from ToM and pragmatics among the 36 datasets used for behavioral evaluations. 

3.4 Localization Results 

The distributions of units selected by the eight local-izers are shown in Figure 2 for three models. The plot suggests differences in the distributions among localizers; e.g., for CommunicativeIntent highly ac-tive units are concentrated in the last layers, while for LatentBeliefs mid to late layers are active. Also, the LB + CI localizer seems to be more conserva-tive: often less than 1% of the models’ units were significantly active. The patterns appear to be quali-tatively similar across model sizes (see Figures 8–9 in the appendix for full results). 

> Figure 2: Percentage of localized units across model lay-ers (x-axis) identified by different target subnetwork lo-calizers (colors) for Qwen-2.5 Instruct models (shapes).

To assess the general robustness of the localiza-tions, we used 10-fold cross-validation, splitting the localizer stimuli into 90:10 localization and test-ing splits. We identified active units on the local-ization split, recorded the activations of these units for the target and control condition of the testing split, and conducted a two-sided t-test ( α = 0 .05 )on these test activations for each fold, determining whether the units’ activity is significantly different. Across models, we find the highest generalization rate ( ≥ 9 significant folds) for the localizers all, MoralIntent and GameBeliefs, high rates ( ≥ 8 sig-nificant folds) for simple CommunicativeIntent and LatentBeliefs, and lower generalization rates (5–7 significant folds) for conjunctive suites. 5

These results suggest localization is systematic and reproducible, non-random across layers, and that different localizer suites may yield different localized subnetworks, and localizations with the conjunctive suites may be subject to more noise. 

3.5 Ablating Localized Subnetworks 

To assess the causal role of the localized networks, we conducted ablation experiments with all eight lo-calizers, evaluating 20 models on selected datasets (see Section 3.3) with as in Section 2.2. We test predictions about three causal effects (on ToM, on pragmatics and on syntax), which, if observed, conjunctively provide evidence for func-tional integration (see the upper panel of Figure 3): 

P1.1 ToM-network ablation decreases performance 

> 5Due to a coding error, results for the LB + CI suite could not be included at the time of writing.

6Qwen2.5-72B-Instruct ✅       

> Hypothesis 2
> P2.2
> P1.2
> P1.1
> P2.1
> P3.2
> P3.1
> Potential outcome predicted
> by functional integration hypothesis Prediction 1 Prediction 2 Prediction 3
> Causal effects across models
> and localizers ✅
> LatentBeliefs (simple) ✅MoralIntent (simple) 🤯

Figure 3: All: Plots show the mean causal effects (y-axis), i.e., difference in accuracy relative to the non-ablated baseline when ablating the critical (ToM) subnetworks or the control (least active) sub-networks (x-axis), for different test sets (colors and shapes). 95% CIs indicate change in by-dataset accuracy across localizer suites. Top row: Fictitious, stylized result that could come from our experiments (left-most plot), and a visualization of the three main predictions made by the functional integration hypothesis. Bottom row: Four observed outcomes at different levels of analysis. Results from the “global analysis” (marginalizing over all language models and localizers) are shown on the left; followed by example results for data from only one language model (averaging over localizers) and two localizer sets (averaging over language models). Predictions are supported for the “global analysis,” but not for all subunits at finer levels of analysis (e.g., the right-most example in the bottom row). 

on ToM-related tasks 

P1.2 causal effect (CE) on ToM-task performance is bigger for ToM ablation than for control 

P2.1 ToM-network ablation decreases performance on pragmatic tasks 

P2.2 CE on pragmatic abilities is bigger for ToM ablation than for control 

P3.1 ToM-network ablation does not decrease per-formance on syntax (BLiMP) 

P3.2 CE is bigger on pragmatics than on syntax These predictions can be tested at different lev-els of aggregation. For example, results for some localizers may conform to our predictions better than results from others (see the two right-most plots on the bottom row of Figure 3). In light of such variation, the most insightful conclusions are those from a “global analysis,” which marginal-izes over all LMs and all localization methods and whose results are shown in the left-most facet in the bottom row of Figure 3. In order to test pre-dictions from the “global analysis” we inspect the relevant (marginalized) posterior probabilities from a Bayesian beta regression model. 6 Marginaliz-

> 6

Model in R syntax: accuracy ∼ model_type +model_size + ablation_localizer * domain , where 

ing across localizers and models, both P1.1 ( β =0.24[0 .14 , 0.35] ) and P1.2 ( β = 0 .07[0 .02 , 0.11] )are credibly borne out in our results, providing ev-idence for a general causal role of the localized ToM networks for LMs’ ToM performance. Sim-ilarly, both P2.1 ( β = 0 .30[0 .21 , 0.40] ) and P2.2 (β = 0 .07[0 .03 , 0.11] ) were credibly borne out, indicating that the ToM subnetworks were gener-ally causally involved in LMs’ pragmatic perfor-mance. Finally, the data supports P3.1 (no cred-ible decrease of syntax performance under ToM ablation: β = 0 .15[ −0.17 , 0.49] ), but not P3.2 (β = 0 .15[ −0.20 , 0.48] ), offering mild evidence that the causal role of the ToM subnetworks is stronger for pragmatic than syntactic capabilities, from the “global” point of view. Taken together, our results lend credence to the idea that ToM and pragmatic reasoning do share causally relevant functional units to a non-trivial degree. Towards further exploration, when testing pre-dictions separately for each of the eight localizers, we observe that, across models, predictions 1 and 2 were borne out only for LatentBeliefs (simple & 

ablation_localizer is a variable with 17 levels combin-ing the two ablations and eight localizations procedures and the baseline intact condition. 

7conjunctive) and GameBeliefs (simple), suggesting that these drive the main results above (shown in Figure 10, full statistical results presented in Ta-ble 5 in the Appendix). For all other localizers (except for CommunicativeIntent (conjunctive)), only P1.1, P2.1 and P3.1 were borne out. We note that the three localizers supporting our predictions in full also showed similar distributional patterns in the models (Figure 2), different from other local-izers. Results for all localizers and all models are shown in the Appendix in Figures 12–13. For better understanding of the localization meth-ods, we compare the causal effects of ablations of subnetworks localized with the simple vs. the conjunctive method for LatentBeliefs (LB) and CommunicativeIntent (CI). Aggregating causal ef-fects on ToM and pragmatics relative to the base-line (P1.1 and P2.1), we find no credible differ-ences for LB ( β = 0.06[ −0.03 , 0.15] ), nor CI (β = 0 .06[ −0.03 , 0.15] ). Relative to the control ablation (P1.2 and P2.2), we also find no credi-ble differences (LB: β = 0 .10[ −0.03 , 0.23] , CI: 

β = 0 .07 , [−0.06 , 0.20] ). The proportion of the units localized by both methods is moderately high (LB = 0.50, CI = 0.66). This suggests that (i) simple and conjunctive strategies may be interchangeable, and (ii) the obserserved causal effects may be due to only a subset of the localized subnetworks. Additionally, we compare the causal effects of the ToM ablation between different model sizes using a beta regression model with a three-way interaction. 7 Averaged across localizers, we found no credible differences (L vs. M mod-els: ToM: β = 0.15[ −0.12 , 0.42] , pragmatics: 

β = 0 .13[ −0.13 , 0.39] ; M vs. S models: ToM: 

β = −0.04[ −0.27 , 0.19] , pragmatics: β =

−0.04[ −0.46 , 0.39] ). 

4 Discussion 

This paper offered five contributions towards ad-dressing the overarching research question of whether LMs contain “social world models” — la-tent representations of information related to so-cial reasoning about other minds. (1) We outlined the functional integration hypothesis, according to which internal representations and computational mechanisms are shared between ToM and prag-matic reasoning tasks, and we derived concrete, testable predictions from this view. (2) We report     

> 7Model in R syntax: accuracy ∼model_type +model_size * ablation_localizer * domain .

stringent theory-driven statistical analyses based on data from both behavioral evaluations and causal ablation studies which provide suggestive evidence in favor of the functional integration view. (3) Improving on previous work (AlKhamissi et al., 2025a), this paper contributes four novel synthet-ically generated localization suites with a total of 1400 stimuli based on localizers carefully assem-bled from prior work in cognitive neuroscience that spans a substantial swath of various aspects of ToM reasoning. (4) We ported established meth-ods from neuroscience (the conjunctive analysis) into the realm of language models, and presented first results to assess their value. (5) Finally, we explored a finer-grained analysis of ToM based on the ATOMS framework and found that its subcat-egories are indeed predictive of benchmark accu-racies. They also help to interpret the results from the causal ablation studies, where the ablation of localized subnetworks addressing those ATOMS categories that were part of the best explanations of the behavioral data had the strongest causal effect of interest on LMs’ ToM and pragmatic capabili-ties, although it remains puzzling why ablating the subnetwork identified by the CommunicativeIntent localizer did not have the predicted causal effect. Even though we found support for various causal effects predicted by a functional integration view, our results hinge on whether the datasets used for localizations and behavioral analysis indeed opera-tionalize the right kinds of concepts (general ToM, specific aspects in the ATOMS framework, prag-matic reasoning etc.). As is the case with human experiments, the validity of methods and opera-tions require converging evidence from many like-minded investigations and replications. What is more, while it is commonly assumed that ToM and pragmatics tasks recruit reasoning about mental causes, we should be open to the possibility that, also in humans, explicit social reasoning trades off with cheaper heuristics (Rubio-Fernandez, 2024). Together, these considerations underline the im-portance of an interdisciplinary perspective on lan-guage abilities, closely comparing human and ma-chine solutions to superficially similar tasks. In this spirit, the present paper contributes by investigating LMs’ functional mechanisms of different aspects of social reasoning at a high resolution, offering ex-citing avenues for future investigations of the exact relation between different capabilities and of the architectural pressures shaping LMs’ “social world models.” 8Limitations 

The presented functional localization and evalua-tions make a number of design choices in the pro-cedure which are known to potentially impact the results (Bommasani et al., 2023), and future work should evaluate the robustness of the results to such design choices. For the baseline and ablation behavioral evalua-tions, we choose to use means over the conditional log probabilities of the answer tokens. For the subnetwork localization, we used one general in-struction and one specific prompt format across stimuli. All localizer stimuli contained a forced-choice task, which was formulated as a sentence continuation task with two answer options for all lo-calizer suites, except for CommunicativeIntent, for which the task was a meta-linguistic judgment task to select whether an utterance was literal, ironic, deceitful or meaningless. Furthermore, to ablate the localized subnetwork, the identified units were set to zero; however, al-ternative approaches also exist (Heimersheim and Nanda, 2024). The size of the ablated subnetworks is also set to the minimum of the top-most active 1% of the units and all significantly active units; however, smaller or larger ablation rates could also be explored (cf. AlKhamissi et al., 2025a). The ATOMS annotations used for more fine-grained analyses of ToM were, in part, provided by the authors, resulting in a low number of an-notations and potential noise due to ambiguity of commonly used ToM and pragmatics evaluation benchmarks. The annotations could be improved upon in future work through, e.g., crowdsourcing. Furthermore, future work could expand the se-lection of datasets used to evaluate the syntactic abilities of models beyond the BLiMP dataset. Ad-ditionally, all datasets focus exclusively on English, a resource-rich language; in particular, pragmatics datasets in other languages may differ with respect to the cultural and social norms that must be rea-soned about. The ToM datasets contain a large proportion of false-belief tasks, whereas real-world language use may provide more evidence for true-belief-based reasoning, which may therefore be strongly represented in LMs’ training data. Finally, since some of our datasets have been publicly avail-able for several years, there is a risk that the training data of recent models are contaminated with these datasets. Although the synthetic generation of novel lo-calizer materials was based on validated materi-als from neuroscience research and allowed for a larger-scale study with language models, these new materials have not been validated in human fMRI studies. Therefore, while drawing inspiration from cognitive neuroscience research, our conclusions should not be taken as claims about human-likeness of the functional organization of LMs. In general, localized subnetwork ablation exper-iments offer only limited, coarse-grained insights about LMs’ internal organization; achieving a more precise understanding of the causal role of single units for ToM and pragmatic performance will re-quire alternative techniques like causal tracing or mediation methods, such as activation and attribu-tion patching and circuit discovery (Wang et al., 2022). 

Acknowledgments 

JFK, AM anf MF were supported by the Volkswa-gen Foundation through a Momentum grant. MF is a member of the Machine Learning Cluster of Excellence at University of Tübingen, EXC num-ber 2064/2 – Project number 39072764. PT and MF gratefully acknowledge support by the state of Baden-Württemberg through bwHPC and the German Research Foundation (DFG) through grant INST 35/1597-1 FUGG, and the data storage ser-vice SDS@hd supported by the Ministry of Sci-ence, Research and the Arts Baden-Württemberg (MWK) and the German Research Foundation (DFG) through grant INST 35/1803-1 FUGG and INST 35/1804-1 LAGG. 

References    

> Badr AlKhamissi, Greta Tuckute, Antoine Bosselut, and Martin Schrimpf. 2025a. The LLM language network: A neuroscientific approach for identify-ing causally task-relevant units. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 10887–10911, Albuquerque, New Mexico. Association for Computational Linguis-tics. Badr AlKhamissi, Greta Tuckute, Yingtian Tang, Taha Osama A Binhuraib, Antoine Bosselut, and Mar-tin Schrimpf. 2025b. From language to cognition: How LLMs outgrow the human language network. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empiri-cal Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 24321–24339, Suzhou, China. Association for Com-putational Linguistics.

9Dare A. Baldwin and Megan M. Saylor. 2005. Lan-guage Promotes Structural Alignment in the Acqui-sition of Mentalistic Concepts. In Janet Wilde Ast-ington and Jodie A. Baird, editors, Why Language Matters for Theory of Mind , page 0. Oxford Univer-sity Press. Simon Baron-Cohen, Alan M Leslie, and Uta Frith. 1985. Does the autistic child have a “theory of mind”? Cognition , 21(1):37–46. Cindy Beaudoin, Élizabel Leblanc, Charlotte Gagner, and Miriam H Beauchamp. 2020. Systematic review and inventory of theory of mind measures for young children. Frontiers in psychology , 10:2905. Emily M. Bender, Timnit Gebru, Angelina McMillan-Major, and Shmargaret Shmitchell. 2021. On the dangers of stochastic parrots: Can language models be too big? In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Confer-ence on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency ,pages 610—623, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machinery. Emily M. Bender and Alexander Koller. 2020. Climbing towards NLU: On meaning, form, and understanding in the age of data. In Proceedings of the 58th An-nual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 5185–5198. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Leonard Bereska and Stratis Gavves. 2024. Mechanistic interpretability for AI safety - a review. Transactions on Machine Learning Research .Rishi Bommasani, Percy Liang, and Tony Lee. 2023. Holistic evaluation of language models. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences , 1525(1):140–146. Matteo Bortoletto, Constantin Ruhdorfer, Lei Shi, and Andreas Bulling. 2024. Brittle minds, fixable ac-tivations: Understanding belief representations in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.17513 .Francesca M. Bosco, Alberto Parola, Maria C. Valen-tini, and Rosalba Morese. 2017. Neural correlates underlying the comprehension of deceitful and ironic communicative intentions. Cortex , 94:73–86. Paul-Christian Bürkner. 2017. brms: An r package for bayesian multilevel models using stan. Journal of statistical software , 80:1–28. Li-Ang Chang, Konstantinos Armaos, Lotte Warns, Ava Q Ma de Sousa, Femke Paauwe, Christin Scholz, and Jan B Engelmann. 2023. Mentalizing in an eco-nomic games context is associated with enhanced ac-tivation and connectivity in the left temporoparietal junction. Social cognitive and affective neuroscience ,18(1):nsad023. Xufeng Duan, Xinyu Zhou, Bei Xiao, and Zhenguang Cai. 2025. Unveiling language competence neurons: A psycholinguistic approach to model interpretability. In Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Computational Linguistics , pages 10148–10157, Abu Dhabi, UAE. Association for Computational Linguistics. Evelina Fedorenko, Po-Jang Hsieh, Alfonso Nieto-Castañón, Susan Whitfield-Gabrieli, and Nancy Kan-wisher. 2010. New method for fMRI investigations of language: defining ROIs functionally in individual subjects. Journal of neurophysiology , 104(2):1177– 1194. Kanishk Gandhi, Jan-Philipp Fränken, Tobias Gersten-berg, and Noah Goodman. 2023. Understanding social reasoning in language models with language models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:13518–13529. Elizabeth Jasmi George and Radhika Mamidi. 2020. Conversational implicatures in english dialogue: Annotated dataset. Procedia Computer Science ,171:2316–2323. Paul Herbert Grice. 1975. Logic and conversation. In Peter Cole and Jerry L. Morgan, editors, Syntax and Semantics, Vol. 3, Speech Acts , pages 41–58. Aca-demic Press, New York. Yuling Gu, Oyvind Tafjord, Hyunwoo Kim, Jared Moore, Ronan Le Bras, Peter Clark, and Yejin Choi. 2024. Simpletom: Exposing the gap between explicit tom inference and implicit tom application in llms. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.13648 .Michael Hanna, Yonatan Belinkov, and Sandro Pezzelle. 2025. Are formal and functional linguistic mecha-nisms dissociated in language models? Computa-tional Linguistics , pages 1–40. Miriam Hauptman, Idan Blank, and Evelina Fedorenko. 2023. Non-literal language processing is jointly sup-ported by the language and theory of mind networks: evidence from a novel meta-analytic fmri approach. 

Cortex , 162:96–114. Stefan Heimersheim and Neel Nanda. 2024. How to use and interpret activation patching. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.15255 .Jennifer Hu, Sammy Floyd, Olessia Jouravlev, Evelina Fedorenko, and Edward Gibson. 2023. A fine-grained comparison of pragmatic language under-standing in humans and language models. In Pro-ceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 4194–4213, Toronto, Canada. Associ-ation for Computational Linguistics. Anna A Ivanova, Aalok Sathe, Benjamin Lipkin, Un-nathi U Kumar, Setayesh Radkani, Thomas H Clark, Carina Kauf, Jennifer Hu, RT Pramod, Gabriel Grand, and 1 others. 2025. Elements of world knowledge (ewok): A cognition-inspired framework for eval-uating basic world knowledge in language models. 

Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 13:1245–1270. 

10 Paloma Jeretic, Alex Warstadt, Suvrat Bhooshan, and Adina Williams. 2020. Are natural language infer-ence models IMPPRESsive? Learning IMPlicature and PRESupposition. In Proceedings of the 58th An-nual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 8690–8705, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics. Cameron R. Jones, Sean Trott, and Benjamin Bergen. 2024. Comparing humans and large language models on an experimental protocol inventory for theory of mind evaluation (EPITOME). Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 12:803– 819. Matthew Le, Y-Lan Boureau, and Maximilian Nickel. 2019. Revisiting the evaluation of theory of mind through question answering. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-ral Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages 5872–5877, Hong Kong, China. Association for Computational Linguistics. Stephen C. Levinson. 1983. Pragmatics . Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK. Belinda Z. Li, Maxwell Nye, and Jacob Andreas. 2021. Implicit representations of meaning in neural lan-guage models. In Proceedings of ACL .Kenneth Li, Aspen K Hopkins, David Bau, Fernanda Viégas, Hanspeter Pfister, and Martin Wattenberg. 2023. Emergent world representations: Exploring a sequence model trained on a synthetic task. In 

Proceedings of ICLR 11 .Bolei Ma, Yuting Li, Wei Zhou, Ziwei Gong, Yang Janet Liu, Katja Jasinskaja, Annemarie Friedrich, Julia Hirschberg, Frauke Kreuter, and Barbara Plank. 2025. Pragmatics in the era of large language models: A survey on datasets, evaluation, opportunities and chal-lenges. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Vol-ume 1: Long Papers) , pages 8679–8696, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computational Linguistics. Ziqiao Ma, Jacob Sansom, Run Peng, and Joyce Chai. 2023. Towards a holistic landscape of situated theory of mind in large language models. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023 , pages 1011–1031, Singapore. Association for Computational Linguistics. Kyle Mahowald, Anna A. Ivanova, Idan A. Blank, Nancy Kanwisher, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, and Evelina Fedorenko. 2024. Dissociating language and thought in large language models. Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 28(6):517–540. Nicole Maslan, Melissa Roemmele, and Andrew S Gor-don. 2015. One hundred challenge problems for logical formalizations of commonsense psychology. In AAAI Spring Symposia .R Thomas McCoy, Shunyu Yao, Dan Friedman, Mathew D Hardy, and Thomas L Griffiths. 2024. Embers of autoregression show how large language models are shaped by the problem they are trained to solve. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 121(41):e2322420121. Thomas Nichols, Matthew Brett, Jesper Andersson, Tor Wager, and Jean-Baptiste Poline. 2005. Valid con-junction inference with the minimum statistic. Neu-roimage , 25(3):653–660. Soyoung Oh, Xinting Huang, Mathis Pink, Michael Hahn, and Vera Demberg. 2025. Tug-of-war between idiom’s figurative and literal meanings in llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.01723 .Shereen Oraby, Vrindavan Harrison, Lena Reed, Ernesto Hernandez, Ellen Riloff, and Marilyn Walker. 2016. Creating and characterizing a diverse corpus of sarcasm in dialogue. In Proceedings of the 17th Annual Meeting of the Special Interest Group on Dis-course and Dialogue , pages 31–41, Los Angeles. Association for Computational Linguistics. Paula Rubio-Fernandez. 2024. Cultural evolutionary pragmatics: Investigating the codevelopment and co-evolution of language and social cognition. Psycho-logical Review , 131(1):18–35. Sahand Sabour, Siyang Liu, Zheyuan Zhang, June Liu, Jinfeng Zhou, Alvionna Sunaryo, Tatia Lee, Rada Mi-halcea, and Minlie Huang. 2024. EmoBench: Eval-uating the emotional intelligence of large language models. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Vol-ume 1: Long Papers) , pages 5986–6004, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Computational Linguistics. Maarten Sap, Ronan Le Bras, Daniel Fried, and Yejin Choi. 2022. Neural theory-of-mind? on the limits of social intelligence in large LMs. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-ural Language Processing , pages 3762–3780, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Maarten Sap, Hannah Rashkin, Derek Chen, Ronan Le Bras, and Yejin Choi. 2019. Social IQa: Com-monsense reasoning about social interactions. In 

Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Lan-guage Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages 4463– 4473, Hong Kong, China. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. Karahan Sarıta¸ s, Kıvanç Tezören, and Yavuz Dur-mazkeser. 2025. A systematic review on the eval-uation of large language models in theory of mind tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.08796 .Rebecca Saxe, Matthew Brett, and Nancy Kanwisher. 2006. Divide and conquer: A defense of functional localizers. NeuroImage , 30(4):1088–1096. 

11 Rebecca Saxe and Nancy Kanwisher. 2003. People thinking about thinking people: The role of the temporo-parietal junction in “theory of mind”. Neu-roImage , 19(4):1835–1842. Natalie Shapira, Guy Zwirn, and Yoav Goldberg. 2023. How well do large language models perform on faux pas tests? In Findings of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics: ACL 2023 , pages 10438–10451, Toronto, Canada. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Settaluri Sravanthi, Meet Doshi, Pavan Tankala, Rudra Murthy, Raj Dabre, and Pushpak Bhattacharyya. 2024. PUB: A pragmatics understanding benchmark for assessing LLMs’ pragmatics capabilities. In Find-ings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024 , pages 12075–12097, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Computational Linguistics. Theodore Sumers, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan, and Thomas Griffiths. 2023. Cognitive architectures for language agents. Transactions on Machine Learn-ing Research .Shubham Toshniwal, Sam Wiseman, Karen Livescu, and Kevin Gimpel. 2022. Chess as a testbed for language model state tracking. Preprint ,arXiv:2102.13249. Greta Tuckute, Nancy Kanwisher, and Evelina Fe-dorenko. 2024. Language in brains, minds, and machines. Annual Review of Neuroscience ,47(2024):277–301. Tomer Ullman. 2023. Large language models fail on trivial alterations to theory-of-mind tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.08399 .Keyon Vafa, Justin Y. Chen, Ashesh Rambachan, Jon Kleinberg, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2024. Evaluat-ing the world model implicit in a generative model. In Proceedings of NeurIPS 38 .Kevin Wang, Alexandre Variengien, Arthur Conmy, Buck Shlegeris, and Jacob Steinhardt. 2022. In-terpretability in the wild: a circuit for indirect ob-ject identification in gpt-2 small. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.00593 .Alex Warstadt, Alicia Parrish, Haokun Liu, Anhad Mo-hananey, Wei Peng, Sheng-Fu Wang, and Samuel R. Bowman. 2020. BLiMP: The benchmark of linguis-tic minimal pairs for English. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 8:377– 392. Heinz Wimmer and Josef Perner. 1983. Beliefs about beliefs: Representation and constraining function of wrong beliefs in young children’s understanding of deception. Cognition , 13(1):103–128. Hainiu Xu, Runcong Zhao, Lixing Zhu, Jinhua Du, and Yulan He. 2024. OpenToM: A comprehensive bench-mark for evaluating theory-of-mind reasoning capa-bilities of large language models. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pages 8593–8623, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Computational Linguistics. Liane Young, Fiery Cushman, Marc Hauser, and Re-becca Saxe. 2007. The neural basis of the interac-tion between theory of mind and moral judgment. 

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences ,104(20):8235–8240. Eliezer Yudkowsky. 2023. Gpts are predictors, not imi-tators. lesswrong.com. Deborah Zaitchik. 1990. When representations conflict with reality: The preschooler’s problem with false beliefs and “false” photographs. Cognition , 35(1):41– 68. Wentao Zhu, Zhining Zhang, and Yizhou Wang. 2024. Language models represent beliefs of self and others. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.18496 .

A Behavioral Evaluation 

A.1 ATOMS Categories 

The ATOMS framework (Beaudoin et al., 2020) is an approach to classify ToM experiments based on the specific capabilities they investigate. While Beaudoin et al. (2020) use the framework to mostly classify ToM measures into disjoint categories (such that each task is placed in the best-fitting ATOMS category only), in practice, many experi-ments address more than one aspect of ToM. We follow Ma et al. (2023) in that we characterize ToM tasks according to all ATOMS aspects for which we deem them relevant. The ATOMS framework encompasses seven broad categories, each with subdivisions: 1) The 

beliefs category targets the capability to ascribe beliefs to actors that may be different from one’s own beliefs, such as required in the Sally-Anne task (Baron-Cohen et al., 1985). This also includes second-order beliefs, i.e., beliefs about other peo-ple’s beliefs. 2) The intentions category targets the capability to ascribe intentions to people and to distinguish these intentions from their actions. 3) The desires category encompasses tasks that require ascribing desires to actors. 4) Emotions 

refers to the ability to predict other people’s emo-tions from events, and to understand that other peo-ple may hide or regulate their emotions such that they are not directly accessible. 5) The knowledge 

category concerns being aware of different people having different knowledge which may result in different actions. 6) Percepts include perspective taking (visual and otherwise), and being aware that 12 actors’ actions may differ depending on what they have perceived. 7) The mentalistic understanding of non-literal communication category includes tasks involving irony, humor, or lies. For detailed introductions of the categories, see Beaudoin et al. (2020); Ma et al. (2023). The ATOMS categories (on a coarse-grained level) addressed by the test datasets used in this study are listed in Table 2. 

A.2 Datasets A.2.1 Theory-of-Mind Datasets BigToM (Gandhi et al., 2023) is a benchmark on social reasoning / ToM capabilities. The individ-ual items in the dataset are paired false-belief and true-belief situations generated by an LLM in ac-cordance to a predefined framework. The questions in BigToM involve either forward ToM, i.e., in-ferring a person’s beliefs based on what they did or did not observe, and backward ToM, i.e., infer-ring a person’s beliefs based on their subsequent actions. The items contain two answer options per item. We consider an LM’s prediction for a single item correct only if the correct answer options are selected both for the false-belief and the true-belief situations. 

EmoBench (Sabour et al., 2024) is a benchmark on emotional intelligence assessing both emotional understanding and its application. The EmoBench tasks focus on aspects such as complex emotions, perspective taking, emotional cues, personal beliefs and experiences, and subcategories of these aspects. The associated questions are phrased as multiple choice questions, where we compare the correct answer with all incorrect answers and consider a model’s choice as correct if the conditional prob-ability of the correct answer, given then context, is higher than all conditional probabilities of the incorrect answers. 

EPITOME (Jones et al., 2024) is a battery of six ToM-related experiments, of which we use two (in addition to the scalar implicature task described in the following section): recursive mindreading and false belief. The recursive mindreading task tests the representation of recursively embedded mental states. The false belief task uses a setting similar to the Sally-Anne task (Baron-Cohen et al., 1985). All questions are phrased as multiple-choice questions. 

EWoK (Ivanova et al., 2025) is a framework for evaluating world modeling abilities. It con-sists of eleven tasks, out of which we use three: agent properties, social properties, and social in-teractions. The agent properties split requires to estimate which one of two propositions about the properties of an agent (such as mental states or pref-erences) is true, given some context. In the social properties split, the two alternatives are socially rel-evant agent properties (e.g., character traits). In the social interactions split, there are two agents, and the answer alternatives are possible social relations between them (e.g., cooperating or competing with each other). Each item contains two contexts and two answer options, each being the correct answer for one of the contexts. We apply the same proce-dure for retrieving predictions for each item as for BigToM. 

FauxPasEAI (Shapira et al., 2023) is a dataset intended for evaluating the ability to recognize sit-uationally inappropriate utterances. The original dataset has four questions Q1-Q4, of which we ex-clude Q2 because it is an open-ended question and Q3 because it does not directly concern ToM abili-ties. The remaining questions Q1 and Q4 are both “yes/no”-questions, where Q1 targets recognizing whether there is a situationally inappropriate utter-ance, while Q4 concerns the knowledge available to the person uttering it. 

OpenToM (Xu et al., 2024) is a ToM bench-mark for LLM evaluation consisting of several ToM-related subtasks where an object is moved in the presence or absence of observers (following the schema of the Sally-Anne test, Baron-Cohen et al., 1985). The dataset encompasses 1) first-order false belief tasks with both coarse-grained ques-tions (which ask about somebody’s belief whether the location has changed) and fine-grained ques-tions (which ask about somebody’s belief about the exact location), 2) second-order false belief tasks, 3) multi-hop tasks, which are modifications of the false-belief tasks aiming to address the understand-ing of social norms, and 4) an attitude task that concerns the attitude of an observer towards the mover’s action. 

SimpleToM (Gu et al., 2024) is a dataset de-signed to test LLMs’ abilities to infer mental states implicitly. This is tested using three types of ques-tions, namely, mental state questions, behavior pre-diction questions, and judgement questions. We only use the behavior prediction split, where the task is to predict which of two actions a person is more likely to perform next in some context (based on implicit reasoning about their mental state). 13 Dataset beliefs intentions desires emotions knowledge percepts NLC BigToM (Gandhi et al., 2023)                                                                                                                                                             

> •forward ✓××××✓×•backward ✓××××✓×
> EmoBench (Sabour et al., 2024) ✓××✓×××
> EPITOME (Jones et al., 2024)
> •false belief ✓××××××•recursive mindreading ✓××××××
> EWoK (Ivanova et al., 2025)
> •agent properties ✓×××✓✓×•social properties ×××✓×××•social interactions ×✓×✓×××
> FauxPasEAI (Shapira et al., 2023)
> •Q1 & Q4 ✓✓××××✓
> OpenToM (Xu et al., 2024)
> •coarse-grained first-order ✓××××✓×•coarse-grained second-order ✓××××✓×•fine-grained first-order ✓××××✓×•fine-grained second-order ✓××××✓×•multi-hop first-order ✓✓✓✓×✓×•multi-hop second-order ✓✓✓✓×✓×•attitude ✓×✓✓×✓×
> SimpleToM (Gu et al., 2024) ×✓×××××
> Social IQa (Sap et al., 2019) ×✓×✓×××
> ToMi (Le et al., 2019)
> •first-order false-belief ✓××××××
> Triangle-COPA (Maslan et al., 2015) ×✓×✓×××

Table 2: Classification of ToM datasets according to the ATOMS framework (Beaudoin et al., 2020). NLC stands for “non-literal communication”. This table takes inspiration and, in part, annotations from those in Ma et al. (2023) and Sarıta¸ s et al. (2025), and includes our own annotations of additional datasets and partial revisions of the annotations. 

The Social IQa dataset (Sap et al., 2019) is de-signed to test language models’ competence in the areas of social and emotional intelligence. It consists of descriptions of situations and multiple-choice questions about aspects such as motivations, reactions, and social consequences. 

ToMi (Le et al., 2019) is a synthetically con-structed dataset of situations resembling the Sally-Anne test (Baron-Cohen et al., 1985), i.e., where a false-belief is created by an object being moved in the absence of a person. The dataset encom-passes questions about first- and second-order true and false beliefs as well as “reality” and “mem-ory” questions. We only use first-order false-beliefs from (Sap et al., 2022), as is also done by (AlKhamissi et al., 2025a). For this dataset, we additionally use the following instruction and format following AlKhamissi et al. (2025a): “The following multiple choice questions is based on the following story. The question is related to Theory-of-Mind. Read the story and then answer the ques-tions. Choose the best answer from the options provided by printing it as is without any modifica-tions. \n Story: {story} \n Question: {question} \n Options: {answer options} \n Answer:”. The Triangle-COPA dataset (Maslan et al., 2015) is a commonsense psychology dataset mea-suring the ability to infer mental or emotional causes and social relations from actions. The agents are represented as geometric shapes (e.g., triangles), which perform some action. A following binary choice question then offers two motivations for the observed behavior, and the task is to identify the more plausible of them. 

A.2.2 Pragmatics Datasets 

From EPITOME (Jones et al., 2024) (see also the section above), we include the scalar implicature task among the pragmatics experiments. This task tests whether some is more likely to be interpreted as meaning not all when the speaker has complete knowledge (because then they could have said all 

as well). The dataset from Hu et al. (2023), here called 

HuFloyd , consists of short stories involving non-literal utterances, and questions about the actual intention of the person uttering them. For each story and utterance, the answer options include the target intention, the literal interpretation, and non-literal distractors (except for the coherence task, where there are only two answer options). The dataset targets a range of pragmatic phenomena, namely, deceits, indirect speech, irony, maxims, metaphor, humour, and coherence. 14 IMPPRES (Jeretic et al., 2020) consists of an implicature and a presupposition task, both of which are also part of the PUB benchmark, through which we access this dataset (Sravanthi et al., 2024, see below). In the implicature task, a premise and a hypothesis are given which involve a scalar im-plicature trigger. The task is then to judge whether the hypothesis is true given the premise or not. The presupposition task is structured analogously, but involves presupposition triggers. We modify the questions and answer options relative to PUB such that instead of asking whether the hypothesis is true or not true, they ask whether it follows from the premise (such that the answer options are: “The hy-pothesis contradicts the premise.”, “The hypothesis follows from the premise.”, “The hypothesis is in no clear relationship with the premise.”). The dataset called LUDWIG (George and Mamidi, 2020) assesses the ability to interpret con-versational implicature correctly. Each stimulus consists of a short dialogue, where a question is followed by a response that does not directly entail “yes” or “no”, but from which the answer can be inferred via conversational implicature. The task then is to judge whether the response means “yes” or “no”. 

PUB (Sravanthi et al., 2024) is a large bench-mark of 14 pragmatics-related tasks for LLM eval-uation. Of these tasks, apart from the two ImpPres tasks described above, we use the following four: 1) indirectness classification (i.e., distinguishing direct from indirect responses), 2) agreement detec-tion (i.e., assessing whether two speakers agree), 3) understanding sarcasm, 4) deictic question an-swering (i.e., correctly inferring whether an object is in some location based on deictic expressions in a dialogue). All these tasks are phrased such that there are exactly two answer options. For agree-ment detection, we modify the answer prefix to be “Speaker 2 ”, and the answer options to be “agrees” and “disagrees”. For indirectness classification, we modify the answer prefix to be “The response is ”, and the answer options to be “direct” and “indi-rect”. 

SarcV2 (Oraby et al., 2016) is a corpus of utter-ances from social media data, which are to be classi-fied into sarcastic and not-sarcastic utterances. The corpus is divided into three subcorpora (generic, hyperbole, and rhetorical questions). We use all three subcorpora without making more fine-grained distinctions. 

A.2.3 Other Datasets 

For comparison, we use items from BLiMP 

(Warstadt et al., 2020), a widely used benchmark on grammatical phenomena in English. BLiMP consists of minimal pairs, where in each pair, one sentence is grammatical and one is ungrammatical. LMs are evaluated by comparing the probabilities they assign to the grammatical and ungrammatical sentences. We use a subset of 10 sample items per category. 

A.3 Prompt Formatting 

The following datasets contain and answer options which can be considered simple continuations of the statement or partial sentence posing the target task: EPITOME, EWoK, SimpleToM, BigToM, HuFloyd, and LUDWIG. When models that have chat templates were evaluated on these datasets, the scored answer options were formatted as part of the user turn content. For the remaining datasets, the optional task, the context and the question or trigger statement were part of the user content, while the answer options were scored as the assistant turn content. No additional task instructions or prompt format-ting were used for any datasets beyond the instruc-tions or formats provided in the original sources of the datasets or described above. Only for the fol-lowing datasets the answer prefix “The answer is: ” was used: FauxPasEAI, SocialIQa, EmoBench. 

A.4 Models 

The following models from seven families were evaluated in the behavioral analysis. All models’ weights were accessed through the HuggingFace platform. The HuggingFace model names are listed below. 

OLMo : allenai/OLMo-1B-0724-hf, allenai/OLMo-7B-0724-hf, allenai/OLMo-7B-0724-Instruct-hf 

Pythia : EleutherAI/pythia-1b-deduped, EleutherAI/pythia-1.4b-deduped, EleutherAI/pythia-2.8b-deduped, EleutherAI/pythia-6.9b-deduped, EleutherAI/pythia-12b-deduped 

Mistral : mistralai/Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.3 

Llama-2 : meta-llama/Llama-2-7b-hf, meta-llama/Llama-2-7b-chat-hf, meta-llama/Llama-2-13b-hf, meta-llama/Llama-2-13b-chat-hf, meta-llama/Llama-2-70b-hf, meta-llama/Llama-2-70b-chat-hf 

Llama-3 : meta-llama/Llama-3.2-1B, meta-llama/Llama-3.1-8B, meta-llama/Llama-3.1-15 Figure 4: Average accuracy (y-axis) for the domains pragmatics, theory of mind and syntax (color) by model size (x-axis). 

8B-Instruct, meta-llama/Llama-3.1-70B, meta-llama/Llama-3.3-70B-Instruct 

Falcon : tiiuae/Falcon3-1B-Base, tiiuae/Falcon3-1B-Instruct, tiiuae/Falcon3-3B-Base, tiiuae/Falcon3-3B-Instruct, tiiuae/Falcon3-7B-Base, tiiuae/Falcon3-7B-Instruct, tiiuae/Falcon3-10B-Base, tiiuae/Falcon3-10B-Instruct 

Gemma : google/gemma-2-2b, google/gemma-2-9b, google/gemma-2-9b-it, google/gemma-2-27b, google/gemma-2-27b-it 

Qwen : Qwen/Qwen2.5-0.5B, Qwen/Qwen2.5-0.5B-Instruct, Qwen/Qwen2.5-1.5B, Qwen/Qwen2.5-1.5B-Instruct, Qwen/Qwen2.5-3B, Qwen/Qwen2.5-3B-Instruct, Qwen/Qwen2.5-7B, Qwen/Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct, Qwen/Qwen2.5-14B, Qwen/Qwen2.5-14B-Instruct, Qwen/Qwen2.5-32B, Qwen/Qwen2.5-32B-Instruct, Qwen/Qwen2.5-72B, Qwen/Qwen2.5-72B-Instruct 

A.5 Additional Results 

We show the models’ average accuracies on the syntax benchmark BLiMP, next to the accuracies on ToM and pragmatics in Figure 4. Consistent with the literature, accuracy on the complex do-mains ToM and pragmatics increases over model size. However, just model size or model type (base or fine-tuned) are not sufficient for explaining away the connection between pragmatic and ToM perfor-mance of LMs, as shown via model comparison in Section 2.3. 

B Prompts for Stimulus Generation 

For the generation of synthetic stimuli for the conditions FalseBelief, Desire, FalsePhotograph, HumanDescr, NonhumanDescr, MechInf, Game-Belief, and MoralIntent, we used the following prompt: 

Please generate twenty more stories and questions following the structure of the given examples: —-[examples] 

The examples consisted of five randomly selected items from the original or manually adjusted dataset, separated by "—-" and each structured as follows: 

Story: [story] Question: [question] 

For the conditions Deceptive, Ironic, Literal, and Meaningless, where the question is the same for all items, the following prompt was used: 

Please generate twenty more stories following the structure of the given examples: —-[examples] 

The examples again where five randomly se-lected story items from the original dataset, sep-arated by "—-" and each prefixed by "Story:" For GameOutcome, which is paired with GameBelief by using the same stories but different questions, we used the following prompt: 

For the given story, generate a question analogous to the examples. Examples: [examples] —-Story: [original story] 

Here, the examples were five randomly drawn 16 Figure 5: Detailed overview of the accuracy (y-axis) results of all models (x-axis) on the different pragmatic datasets (facets). 

17 Figure 6: Detailed overview of the accuracy (y-axis) results of all models (x-axis) on the different ToM datasets (facets). 

18 400 425 450 475 

> base base + bel. base + bel. + des. base + bel. + des. + emo. base + bel. + des. + emo. + know. base + bel. + des. + emo. + know. + nlc. base + bel. + des. + emo. + know. + per. base + bel. + des. + emo. + know. + per. + nlc. base + bel. + des. + emo. + nlc. base + bel. + des. + emo. + per. base + bel. + des. + emo. + per. + nlc. base + bel. + des. + know. base + bel. + des. + know. + nlc. base + bel. + des. + know. + per. base + bel. + des. + know. + per. + nlc. base + bel. + des. + nlc. base + bel. + des. + per. base + bel. + des. + per. + nlc. base + bel. + emo. base + bel. + emo. + know. base + bel. + emo. + know. + nlc. base + bel. + emo. + know. + per. base + bel. + emo. + know. + per. + nlc. base + bel. + emo. + nlc. base + bel. + emo. + per. base + bel. + emo. + per. + nlc. base + bel. + int. base + bel. + int. + des. base + bel. + int. + des. + emo. base + bel. + int. + des. + emo. + know. base + bel. + int. + des. + emo. + know. + nlc. base + bel. + int. + des. + emo. + know. + per. base + bel. + int. + des. + emo. + know. + per. + nlc. base + bel. + int. + des. + emo. + nlc. base + bel. + int. + des. + emo. + per. base + bel. + int. + des. + emo. + per. + nlc. base + bel. + int. + des. + know. base + bel. + int. + des. + know. + nlc. base + bel. + int. + des. + know. + per. base + bel. + int. + des. + know. + per. + nlc. base + bel. + int. + des. + nlc. base + bel. + int. + des. + per. base + bel. + int. + des. + per. + nlc. base + bel. + int. + emo. base + bel. + int. + emo. + know. base + bel. + int. + emo. + know. + nlc. base + bel. + int. + emo. + know. + per. base + bel. + int. + emo. + know. + per. + nlc. base + bel. + int. + emo. + nlc. base + bel. + int. + emo. + per. base + bel. + int. + emo. + per. + nlc. base + bel. + int. + know. base + bel. + int. + know. + nlc. base + bel. + int. + know. + per. base + bel. + int. + know. + per. + nlc. base + bel. + int. + nlc. base + bel. + int. + per. base + bel. + int. + per. + nlc. base + bel. + know. base + bel. + know. + nlc. base + bel. + know. + per. base + bel. + know. + per. + nlc. base + bel. + nlc. base + bel. + per. base + bel. + per. + nlc. base + des. base + des. + emo. base + des. + emo. + know. base + des. + emo. + know. + nlc. base + des. + emo. + know. + per. base + des. + emo. + know. + per. + nlc. base + des. + emo. + nlc. base + des. + emo. + per. base + des. + emo. + per. + nlc. base + des. + know. base + des. + know. + nlc. base + des. + know. + per. base + des. + know. + per. + nlc. base + des. + nlc. base + des. + per. base + des. + per. + nlc. base + emo. base + emo. + know. base + emo. + know. + nlc. base + emo. + know. + per. base + emo. + know. + per. + nlc. base + emo. + nlc. base + emo. + per. base + emo. + per. + nlc. base + int. base + int. + des. base + int. + des. + emo. base + int. + des. + emo. + know. base + int. + des. + emo. + know. + nlc. base + int. + des. + emo. + know. + per. base + int. + des. + emo. + know. + per. + nlc. base + int. + des. + emo. + nlc. base + int. + des. + emo. + per. base + int. + des. + emo. + per. + nlc. base + int. + des. + know. base + int. + des. + know. + nlc. base + int. + des. + know. + per. base + int. + des. + know. + per. + nlc. base + int. + des. + nlc. base + int. + des. + per. base + int. + des. + per. + nlc. base + int. + emo. base + int. + emo. + know. base + int. + emo. + know. + nlc. base + int. + emo. + know. + per. base + int. + emo. + know. + per. + nlc. base + int. + emo. + nlc. base + int. + emo. + per. base + int. + emo. + per. + nlc. base + int. + know. base + int. + know. + nlc. base + int. + know. + per. base + int. + know. + per. + nlc. base + int. + nlc. base + int. + per. base + int. + per. + nlc. base + know. base + know. + nlc. base + know. + per. base + know. + per. + nlc. base + nlc. base + per. base + per. + nlc.
> expected log likelihood (LOO−CV)

Figure 7: Statistical comparison of models with different combinations of up to seven ATOMS predictors with LOO cross-validation, showing the estimated expected log-likelihoods for LOO-CV (y-axis) for different models (x-axis). Higher values indicate a model’s better predictive fit to the behavioral accuracy on ToM datasets. All models contain baseline predictors model family, size, type and dataset type (summarized as “base”). The ATOMS predictors are abbreviated (“bel.” = belief, “des.” = desire, “emo.” = emotions, “int.” = intentions, “know.” = knowledge, “per.” = percepts, “nlc.” = non-literal communication). The best model contains the predictors “base + int. + des. + emo. + per. + nlc”, the worst model is the “base” only model. 

items (each consisting of the story and one ques-tion) from the original GameOutcome data, and the original story was a single story item from the synthetic GameBelief data. For DecisionOutcome, which is paired with moral intent by sharing the same overall setting (but not the whole narrative text), we used the following prompt: 

Convert the given story into a similar story (accompanied by a corresponding question) where no moral decision is involved, in analogy to the given examples. Examples: [examples] —-Original story: [original story] 

Here, the examples consisted of five triplets of a MoralIntent story and a DecisionOutcome story and question from the original or manually con-structed data (introduced by "Original:", "New story:", and "Question:" respectively), and the orig-inal story was a single story item from the synthetic MoralIntent data. 

C Localizer Suites 

C.1 Details on each Localizer Suite 

1. LatentBeliefs : to localize the ability to recog-nize latent mental action causes, we generate synthetic stimuli based on 6 items from Saxe and Kanwisher (2003) where a person acts out of a false belief (henceforth called the FalseBelief condition) and on 6 items from the same paper where a person’s desires do not match with the actual course of events (the Desire condition). The corresponding control stimuli are based on four other condi-tions from Saxe and Kanwisher (2003) where no reasoning about mental causes is required: the FalsePhotograph condition involves pho-tographs or other kinds of depictions that de-scribe a state that does not exist anymore (i.e., false content), the HumanDescr condition in-volves physical descriptions of people (to con-trast mental causes from mere mentioning of human attributes), the NonhumanDescr con-dition involves descriptions of non-human ob-jects, and the MechInf conditions requires in-ferring a latent mechanical (i.e., non-mental) 19 cause of an event. Since there are no ques-tions given for the MechInf stories in Saxe and Kanwisher (2003), we manually add cor-responding questions to align the format to that of the other conditions. 8

2. CommunicativeIntent : to localize the ability to recognize latent mental states in communi-cation, we use synthetic stimuli based on data from Bosco et al. (2017). Following Bosco et al. (2017), we contrast a Deceptive condi-tion, where an utterance is used in a deliber-ately misleading way, and an Ironic condition, where an utterance is used ironically, with con-trol conditions where an utterance is meant literally (Literal) or where it is not related to the context at all (Meaningless). 3. GameBeliefs: to localize the ability to reason about the latent causes for agent behavior in the specific setting of strategic games, we use synthetic stimuli based on data from Chang et al. (2023). We generate synthetic stimuli for a GameBelief condition, where reasoning about the motivation for a specific decision in a trust game or ultimatum game is neces-sary, as well as paired GameOutcome stim-uli, which concern the same game settings but merely involve the outcome of the game rather than the player’s motivations. This suite is paired. 4. MoralIntent : to localize the ability to ascribe moral intent to actors, we generate synthetic stimuli based on 12 stimuli from Young et al. (2007), where a person chooses to perform an action despite being aware of its harmful con-sequences for another actor (MoralIntent). We base our synthetic control stimuli on manually created paired control items, where a decision accidentally leads to a harmful outcome for the acting person themselves (DecisionOut-come). This suite is paired. Table 3 includes one example stimulus for each condition, and Table 4 contains the ATOMS cate-gories (on a coarse-grained level) addressed by the localization target conditions. 

C.2 Formatting in Localization Procedures 

For all localizer suites, the following instruction was prepended to each item before they were passed through the model and the activations were 

> 8We only use a subset of 9 of the original mechanical in-ference stories where the actual hidden cause is unambiguous.

retrieved: 

In this experiment, you will read a story, a question or a statement and select the best answer among the provided options. 

Additionally, for the GameBeliefs localizer, the following instructions were appended to the general instruction (selected to match the game mentioned in each particular item): Ultimatum game: The story is about the Ultimatum Game. There are two players who divide a sum of money in this game. The first player, the proposer, proposes a division of the sum with the second player, the responder. The responder can either accept the proposed division or reject it. If the responder accepts, the money is split according to the proposal; if the responder rejects, neither player receives anything. 

Trust game: The story is about the Trust Game. There are two players who play an investment game. Both players are given some quantity of money. The first player is told that they must send some amount of their money to an anonymous second player, though the amount sent may be zero. The first player is also informed that whatever they send will be tripled by the experimenter and given to the second player. The second player is then told to also give some amount of the now-tripled money back to the first player, even if that amount is zero. 

The localization stimuli were formatted into the following template, resulting in the fi-nal language model input: {instruction}Story: {story}\n Statement / question: {question} \n Op-tions:\n{options}\n , where the answer options were formatted as a bullet point list with dashes. For all language models that expect a special template for formatting inputs, i.e., when the cor-responding tokenizer provides a chat template, the inputs were put into the chat template as the user turn of the conversation. Then, an assistant turn was appended with the following content: “An-swer: {answer prefix}” . The answer prefix con-tained the sentence that was to be completed with the answer options of the questions, but without any answers. The parameter to continue the final message was set to True. The last token at which the activations were retrieved was therefore set up 20 to, ideally, concentrate representations of the target latent information required to answer the question. 

D Subnetwork Localization Procedure Details 

We select the following 20 models for our localiza-tion experiments. 

Llama : Llama-3.1-8B, Llama-2-13b-hf, Llama-2-13b-chat-hf, Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct, Llama-3.1-70B, Llama-3.3-70B-Instruct 

Falcon : Falcon3-7B, Falcon3-7B-Instruct, Falcon3-10B, Falcon3-10B-Instruct 

Gemma : gemma-2-9b, gemma-2-9b-it, gemma-2-27b, gemma-2-27b-it 

Qwen : Qwen2.5-7B, Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct, Qwen2.5-32B, Qwen2.5-32B-Instruct, Qwen2.5-72B, Qwen2.5-72B-Instruct In the ablation experiments (Section 3.5), each model was evaluated on BLiMP (Warstadt et al., 2020), and on the following selected ToM and prag-matics datasets on which the intact models showed an above-chance performance (described in detail above in Section A.2): • Llama-3.1-8B: BigToM (forward), EmoBench (emotion application), EmoBench (understanding emotion), EPITOME (recur-sive mindreading), EWoK (agent properties), EWoK (social interactions), FauxPasEAI (Q1 & Q4), HuFloyd (deceits), HuFloyd (indirect speech), HuFloyd (irony), HuFloyd (Gricean maxims), HuFloyd (metaphor), IMPPRES (implicature), IMPPRES (presup-position), LUDWIG, OpenToM (attitude), PUB (agreement detection), PUB (deictic QA), PUB (indirectness classification), PUB (understanding sarcasm), SocialIQA, Triangle-COPA • Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct: BigToM (forward), EmoBench (emotion application), EmoBench (understanding emotion), EPITOME (recur-sive mindreading), EWoK (agent properties), EWoK (social interactions), FauxPasEAI (Q1 & Q4), HuFloyd (deceits), HuFloyd (in-direct speech), HuFloyd (irony), HuFloyd (Gricean maxims), HuFloyd (metaphor), IMP-PRES (implicature), IMPPRES (presupposi-tion), OpenToM (attitude), PUB (agreement detection), PUB (deictic QA), PUB (under-standing sarcasm), SocialIQA, ToMi (first-order false-belief), Triangle-COPA • Llama-2-13b-hf: BigToM (forward), EmoBench (emotion application), EPITOME (recursive mindreading), EWoK (agent prop-erties), EWoK (social interactions), HuFloyd (deceits), HuFloyd (indirect speech), HuFloyd (irony), HuFloyd (Gricean maxims), HuFloyd (metaphor), IMPPRES (presupposition), LUDWIG, OpenToM (attitude), PUB (agree-ment detection), PUB (deictic QA), PUB (understanding sarcasm), SocialIQA, ToMi (first-order false-belief), Triangle-COPA • Llama-2-13b-chat-hf: BigToM (forward), EmoBench (emotion application), EmoBench (understanding emotion), EPITOME (recur-sive mindreading), EWoK (agent properties), EWoK (social interactions), HuFloyd (de-ceits), HuFloyd (indirect speech), HuFloyd (irony), IMPPRES (implicature), IMPPRES (presupposition), LUDWIG, OpenToM (atti-tude), PUB (agreement detection), PUB (de-ictic QA), PUB (indirectness classification), PUB (understanding sarcasm), SocialIQA, Triangle-COPA • Llama-3.1-70B: BigToM (forward), EmoBench (emotion application), EmoBench (understanding emotion), EPITOME (recur-sive mindreading), EWoK (agent properties), EWoK (social interactions), HuFloyd (de-ceits), HuFloyd (indirect speech), HuFloyd (irony), HuFloyd (Gricean maxims), Hu-Floyd (metaphor), IMPPRES (implicature), LUDWIG, PUB (agreement detection), PUB (deictic QA), PUB (indirectness clas-sification), PUB (understanding sarcasm), SocialIQA, Triangle-COPA • Llama-3.3-70B-Instruct: BigToM (forward), EmoBench (emotion application), EmoBench (understanding emotion), EPITOME (recur-sive mindreading), EWoK (agent properties), EWoK (social interactions), FauxPasEAI (Q1 & Q4), HuFloyd (deceits), HuFloyd (in-direct speech), HuFloyd (irony), HuFloyd (Gricean maxims), HuFloyd (metaphor), IMP-PRES (implicature), IMPPRES (presupposi-tion), LUDWIG, OpenToM (attitude), PUB (agreement detection), PUB (deictic QA), PUB (indirectness classification), PUB (un-derstanding sarcasm), SocialIQA, Triangle-COPA 21 • Falcon3-7B: BigToM (forward), EmoBench (emotion application), EmoBench (under-standing emotion), EPITOME (recursive min-dreading), EWoK (agent properties), EWoK (social interactions), FauxPasEAI (Q1 & Q4), HuFloyd (deceits), HuFloyd (indirect speech), HuFloyd (irony), HuFloyd (Gricean maxims), HuFloyd (metaphor), IMPPRES (implicature), IMPPRES (presupposition), LUDWIG, Open-ToM (attitude), PUB (agreement detection), PUB (deictic QA), PUB (indirectness classi-fication), PUB (understanding sarcasm), So-cialIQA, Triangle-COPA • Falcon3-7B-Instruct: BigToM (forward), EmoBench (emotion application), EmoBench (understanding emotion), EPITOME (recur-sive mindreading), EWoK (agent properties), EWoK (social interactions), FauxPasEAI (Q1 & Q4), HuFloyd (deceits), HuFloyd (in-direct speech), HuFloyd (irony), HuFloyd (Gricean maxims), HuFloyd (metaphor), IMP-PRES (implicature), IMPPRES (presupposi-tion), OpenToM (attitude), PUB (indirectness classification), PUB (understanding sarcasm), SocialIQA, Triangle-COPA • Falcon3-10B: BigToM (forward), EmoBench (emotion application), EmoBench (under-standing emotion), EPITOME (recursive min-dreading), EWoK (agent properties), EWoK (social interactions), FauxPasEAI (Q1 & Q4), HuFloyd (deceits), HuFloyd (indirect speech), HuFloyd (irony), HuFloyd (Gricean maxims), HuFloyd (metaphor), IMPPRES (implicature), IMPPRES (presupposition), LUDWIG, Open-ToM (attitude), PUB (agreement detection), PUB (deictic QA), PUB (indirectness classi-fication), PUB (understanding sarcasm), So-cialIQA, Triangle-COPA • Falcon3-10B-Instruct: BigToM (forward), EmoBench (emotion application), EmoBench (understanding emotion), EPITOME (recur-sive mindreading), EWoK (agent properties), EWoK (social interactions), FauxPasEAI (Q1 & Q4), HuFloyd (deceits), HuFloyd (in-direct speech), HuFloyd (irony), HuFloyd (Gricean maxims), HuFloyd (metaphor), IMP-PRES (implicature), IMPPRES (presupposi-tion), OpenToM (attitude), PUB (deictic QA), PUB (indirectness classification), PUB (un-derstanding sarcasm), SocialIQA, Triangle-COPA • all gemma models: ToMi (first-order false-belief), PUB (agreement detection), PUB (in-directness classification), FauxPasEAI (Q1 & Q4), LUDWIG, OpenToM (attitude), HuFloyd (irony), IMPPRES (presupposi-tion), PUB (understanding sarcasm), PUB (deictic QA), HuFloyd (Gricean maxims), HuFloyd (metaphor), IMPPRES (implica-ture), EmoBench (understanding emotion), Triangle-COPA, EWoK (agent properties), HuFloyd (indirect speech), HuFloyd (deceits), BigToM (forward), EWoK (social interac-tions), SocialIQA, EPITOME (recursive min-dreading), EmoBench (emotion application) • Qwen2.5-7B: BigToM (forward), EmoBench (emotion application), EmoBench (under-standing emotion), EPITOME (recursive min-dreading), EWoK (agent properties), EWoK (social interactions), FauxPasEAI (Q1 &Q4), HuFloyd (deceits), HuFloyd (indirect speech), HuFloyd (Gricean maxims), Hu-Floyd (metaphor), IMPPRES (implicature), IMPPRES (presupposition), LUDWIG, Open-ToM (attitude), PUB (agreement detection), PUB (indirectness classification), PUB (un-derstanding sarcasm), SocialIQA, Triangle-COPA • Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct: BigToM (forward), EmoBench (emotion application), EmoBench (understanding emotion), EPITOME (recur-sive mindreading), EWoK (agent properties), EWoK (social interactions), FauxPasEAI (Q1 & Q4), HuFloyd (deceits), HuFloyd (indi-rect speech), HuFloyd (Gricean maxims), Hu-Floyd (metaphor), IMPPRES (implicature), IMPPRES (presupposition), LUDWIG, PUB (deictic QA), PUB (understanding sarcasm), SocialIQA, Triangle-COPA • Qwen2.5-32B: BigToM (forward), EmoBench (emotion application), EmoBench (understanding emotion), EPITOME (recur-sive mindreading), EWoK (agent properties), EWoK (social interactions), FauxPasEAI (Q1 & Q4), HuFloyd (deceits), HuFloyd (indirect speech), HuFloyd (irony), HuFloyd (Gricean maxims), HuFloyd (metaphor), IMPPRES (implicature), IMPPRES (presup-position), LUDWIG, OpenToM (attitude), 22 PUB (agreement detection), PUB (deictic QA), PUB (indirectness classification), PUB (understanding sarcasm), SocialIQA, Triangle-COPA • Qwen2.5-32B-Instruct: BigToM (forward), EmoBench (emotion application), EmoBench (understanding emotion), EPITOME (recur-sive mindreading), EWoK (agent properties), EWoK (social interactions), FauxPasEAI (Q1 & Q4), HuFloyd (deceits), HuFloyd (in-direct speech), HuFloyd (irony), HuFloyd (Gricean maxims), HuFloyd (metaphor), IMP-PRES (implicature), IMPPRES (presuppo-sition), LUDWIG, PUB (deictic QA), So-cialIQA, Triangle-COPA • Qwen2.5-72B: BigToM (forward), EmoBench (emotion application), EmoBench (understanding emotion), EPITOME (recur-sive mindreading), EWoK (agent properties), EWoK (social interactions), FauxPasEAI (Q1 & Q4), HuFloyd (deceits), HuFloyd (indirect speech), HuFloyd (irony), HuFloyd (Gricean maxims), HuFloyd (metaphor), IMPPRES (implicature), IMPPRES (presup-position), LUDWIG, OpenToM (attitude), PUB (agreement detection), PUB (deictic QA), PUB (indirectness classification), PUB (understanding sarcasm), SocialIQA, Triangle-COPA • Qwen2.5-72B-Instruct: BigToM (forward), EmoBench (emotion application), EmoBench (understanding emotion), EPITOME (recur-sive mindreading), EWoK (agent properties), EWoK (social interactions), FauxPasEAI (Q1 & Q4), HuFloyd (deceits), HuFloyd (in-direct speech), HuFloyd (irony), HuFloyd (Gricean maxims), HuFloyd (metaphor), IMP-PRES (implicature), IMPPRES (presupposi-tion), LUDWIG, OpenToM (attitude), PUB (agreement detection), PUB (deictic QA), PUB (indirectness classification), PUB (un-derstanding sarcasm), SocialIQA, Triangle-COPA 23 Figure 8: Distribution of top 1% of most active units across the model layers, identified with respect to the synthetically generated ToM localizer suite through last-token pooling. The mask ‘theory-of-mind’ identified most significant units under simple selection, the mask ‘theory-of-mind-conjunctive’ identified most significant units under conjunctive selection, and the random masks identified the least significant units with respect to the same selection approaches, respectively. 

Figure 9: Distribution of top 1% of least active units across the model layers, identified with respect to the synthetically generated ToM localizer suite through last-token pooling. The mask ‘theory-of-mind’ identified most significant units under simple selection, the mask ‘theory-of-mind-conjunctive’ identified most significant units under conjunctive selection, and the random masks identified the least significant units with respect to the same selection approaches, respectively. 

24 Figure 10: average difference in accuracy, by localizer, across models. 

Figure 11: Average change in accuracy (y-axis) relative to the intact model when applying ablations of the target or least active networks (x-axis) across evaluation datasets and localizer suites for different evaluated models (facets). A stronger decrease in accuracy for the critical ablation on target domains (ToM and pragmatics, color) is better. 95% CIs indicate change in by-dataset accuracy across localizer suites. 

25 LatentBeliefs (Saxe and Kanwisher, 2003) FalseBelief (trgt) Story: Tom dropped his keys in the bowl by the door before going for a run. While he was out, Mia put the keys into the desk drawer to tidy up. Tom came back a bit later. Statement / question: Tom will first look for his keys in the ( • bowl • drawer) Desire (trgt) Story: Coach Ramirez booked the soccer field for Saturday practice. He told the team they’d be outside unless lightning forced them into the gym. A storm never came, and they kept the plan. Statement / question: The coach wanted to practice ( • indoors • outdoors) FalsePhoto (ctrl) Story: A bus schedule was printed last month. Yesterday the transit agency changed Route 9 to depart an hour later. All the old paper schedules are still circulating. Statement / question: On the printed schedule, Route 9 departs ( • earlier • later) HumanDescr (ctrl) Story: Nora never goes out in the rain without her favorite outfit. She wears a bright yellow raincoat and matte black rubber boots. Even her umbrella is speckled with tiny white dots. Statement / question: Nora’s raincoat is ( • yellow • black) MechInf (ctrl) Story: She forgot a full glass bottle of soda in the freezer overnight. By morning, the freezer door was stuck and there were shards of glass around the bottle. The cap was still on, but the liquid had turned to ice and expanded. Statement / question: The bottle shattered because ( • freezing water expanded •

a thief broke in) NonhumDescr (ctrl) Story: Penguins are birds that cannot fly but swim swiftly. They use their stiff wings like flippers to push through the water. A layer of fat keeps them warm in icy seas. Statement / question: In the water, penguins propel themselves mainly with their ( • wings • tails) 

CommunicativeIntent (Bosco et al., 2017) Deceptive (trgt) Story: Oliver has been invited to his manager’s poetry reading. He finds the poems boring and overwrought, but he wants to make a good impression at work. After the reading, his manager asks what he thought. Oliver replies: “It was deeply moving, I loved every minute” Statement / question: Was this ( • literal • deceitful • ironic • meaningless?) Ironic (trgt) Story: Luca and Giulia are driving to a wedding. They hit a standstill on the ring road, horns blaring and heat shimmering off the tarmac. The GPS suddenly adds another hour to their arrival time even though the venue is close by. Giulia looks at the bouquet wilting on the dashboard. Luca sighs and says: “Great, we’ll be early” Statement / question: Was this ( • literal • deceitful • ironic •

meaningless?) Literal (ctrl) Story: Elena is making toast for breakfast but accidentally burns it black. Her partner Diego walks in and raises an eyebrow. Elena answers: "I’ll make another one." Statement / question: Was this (• literal • deceitful • ironic • meaningless?) Meaningless (ctrl) Story: Liam and Nora are doing the weekly shop at the supermarket. They’ve already picked up milk, bread, and fruit. Liam reaches for a carton and asks Nora if they still have eggs at home. Nora answers: “The station is two blocks away” Statement / question: Was this ( • literal • deceitful •

ironic • meaningless?) 

GameBeliefs * (Chang et al., 2023) GameBelief (trgt) Story: Nora and Ben play an Ultimatum Game. Nora is the proposer and receives 20 Euros to divide between her and another player. She intends to offer half to Ben, but a glitch records her offer as 1 Euro. Ben sees 1 Euro on his screen, frowns, and rejects immediately. Statement / question: Ben evidently believes that ( • Nora is trying to cheat him • a glitch reduced the offer) GameOutcome (ctrl) Story: Nora and Ben play an Ultimatum Game. Nora is the proposer and receives 20 Euros to divide between her and another player. She intends to offer half to Ben, but a glitch records her offer as 1 Euro. Ben sees 1 Euro on his screen, frowns, and rejects immediately. Statement / question: Ben will now have ( • 1 Euro • 0 Euro) 

MoralIntent * (Young et al., 2007) MoralIntent (trgt) Story: Anna and her friend are hiking along a cliffside trail when they reach a narrow rock ledge overlooking a canyon. The ledge is unstable and will crumble if someone steps onto it, causing a deadly fall. Because Anna sees deep cracks running through the rock and read a posted warning about recent collapses, she believes the ledge is unsafe and stepping on it could be fatal. Anna urges her friend to step onto the ledge for a better view; the ledge collapses and her friend falls to her death. Statement / question: Urging her friend onto the ledge was ( • permissible • forbidden) DecOutcome (ctrl) Story: Anna and her friend are hiking along a cliffside trail when they reach a narrow rock ledge overlooking a canyon. The ledge is unstable and will crumble if someone steps onto it, causing a deadly fall. While trying to take a photo of the view, Anna steps onto the ledge; it collapses, and she falls to her death. Statement / question: Stepping onto the ledge was ( • a good idea • a bad idea) 

Table 3: Examples of stimuli for all localizer suites. Dots indicate answer options. 

26 Dataset beliefs intentions desires emotions knowledge percepts NLC LatentBelief (Saxe and Kanwisher, 2003)                                               

> •FalseBelief ✓××××✓×•Desire ×✓✓××××
> CommunicativeIntent (Bosco et al., 2017)
> •Deceptive ×✓××××✓
> •Irony ×✓××××✓
> MoralIntent (Chang et al., 2023) ×✓××✓××
> GameBelief (Young et al., 2007) ✓×✓✓×✓×

Table 4: Classification of localizer suites according to the ATOMS framework (Beaudoin et al., 2020). NLC stands for “non-literal communication”. 

Localizer P1.1 P1.2 P2.1 P2.2 P3.1 P3.2 

GB 0.59 0.49 0.58 0.5 0.37 0.21 (simple) [0.46, 0.72] [0.35, 0.62] [0.46, 0.7] [0.38, 0.63] [-0.06, 0.81] [-0.25, 0.66] MI 0.18 -0.11 0.16 -0.08 0.12, 0.05 (simple) [0.05, 0.32] [-0.24, 0.02] [0.04, 0.29] [-0.2, 0.05] [-0.31, 0.55] [-0.4, 0.49] LB + CI 0.14 -0.05 0.21 -0.1 0.06 0.15 (conj.) [0, 0.27] [-0.17, 0.08] [0.09, 0.34] [-0.22, 0.03] [-0.38, 0.5] [-0.3, 0.6] All 0.22 -0.05 0.29 0.05 0.11 0.18 (simple) [0.09, 0.36] [-0.18, 0.07] [0.17, 0.42] [-0.07, 0.18] [-0.32, 0.56] [-0.28, 0.63] CI 0.08 -0.11 0.16 -0.13 0.09 0.08 (conj.) [-0.05, 0.22] [-0.25, 0.02] [0.04, 0.29] [-0.25, -0.01] [-0.35, 0.53] [-0.39, 0.52] CI 0.14 -0.05 0.23 -0.05 0.11 0.12 (simple) [0, 0.28] [-0.18, 0.08] [0.11, 0.36] [-0.18, 0.07] [-0.32, 0.54] [-0.34, 0.57] LB 0.26 0.14 0.36 0.15 0.13 0.22 (conj.) [0.13, 0.39] [0.01, 0.27] [0.23, 0.48] [0.03, 0.27] [-0.3, 0.58] [-0.24, 0.68] LB 0.34 0.27 0.4 0.22 0.19 0.2 (simple) [0.21, 0.47] [0.15, 0.4] [0.27, 0.52] [0.09, 0.34] [-0.24, 0.62] [-0.24, 0.66] 

Table 5: Posterior mean estimates and [95% credible intervals] for assessing the main predictions separately by-localizer. When the credible interval excludes zero, the prediction is borne out. “conj.” stands for conjunctive localizers. 

27 Figure 12: Average change in accuracy across evaluation datasets (y-axis) when different localizer datasets are used (columns) in Llama and Falcon models (rows) when ablating the critical vs. the least active subnetworks (x-axis). 

28 Figure 13: Average change in accuracy across evaluation datasets (y-axis) when different localizer datasets are used (columns) in Gemma and Qwen models (rows) when ablating the critical vs. the least active subnetworks (x-axis). 

29