Title: Toward an Agentic Infused Software Ecosystem

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2602.20979v1

Published Time: Wed, 25 Feb 2026 02:01:13 GMT

Number of Pages: 11

Markdown Content:
# Toward an Agentic Infused Software Ecosystem 

# Mark Marron 

mark.marron@uky.edu University of Kentucky Lexington, Kentucky, USA 

## Abstract 

Fully leveraging the capabilities of AI agents in software develop-ment requires a rethinking of the software ecosystem itself. To this end, this paper outlines the creation of an Agentic Infused Software Ecosystem (AISE), that rests on three pillars. The first, of course, is the AI agents themselves, which in the past 5 years have moved from simple code completion and toward sophisticated independent devel-opment tasks, a trend which will only continue. The second pillar is the programming language and APIs (or tools) that these agents use to accomplish tasks, and increasingly, serve as the communication substrate that humans and AI agents interact and collaborate through. The final pillar is the runtime environment and ecosystem that agents operate within, and which provide the capabilities that programmatic agents use to interface with (and effect actions in) the external world. To realize the vision of AISE, all three pillars must be advanced in a holistic manner, and critically, in a manner that is synergistic for AI agents as they exist today 1, those that will exist in the future, and for the human developers that work alongside them. 

## 1 Framing the Problem 

This paper takes the view that creating a fully realized agentic infused software ecosystem requires a holistic approach to the entire software stack. Agents provide a powerful mechanism for understanding user intents and suggesting possible actions that, are likely, good candidates for accomplishing a task. However, these outputs are not strongly grounded and do not directly provide any guarantees about correctness. Without support from the ecosystem for discovering and managing tools, and an environment that is designed to safely execute these actions, the practical usability of these systems is highly constrained. To address these challenges, this work outlines a complete software stack, from the core programming language, to the tooling ecosystem, to the actual runtime environment, that is focused to supporting the development and operation of agentic software systems. By co-designing these components with the needs of AI agents in mind, we can create a software ecosystem that is uniquely well suited to the challenges of agentic software development, and that can significantly enhance the capabilities of AI agents in this space. Thus, the first action is to outline the core design principals that concepts that guide the decisions and development of the various components of this agentic infused software ecosystem. 

## Explicit Intents and Behaviors 

A key challenge for current AI LLM based agents is their ability to manage context and to (statistically) guess about possibly relevant information that is not explicitly provided in the context window. In   

> 1For the near term we expect these to remain primarily Large Language Model LLM Transformer based

many cases agents are able to successfully infer this information, but there is a long tail of situations where incorrect assumptions can be made. This compounds with the fact that many programming languages and software ecosystems have a wide range of implicit behaviors and special case semantics which creates a level of inci-dental complexity [ 7, 27 ] in the system. Working on code with these implicit or unexpected behaviors now involves understanding the core intent of the code, and then additionally, explicitly or mentally reviewing a checklist of what implicit behaviors and what special case scenarios may be present. This is a significant cognitive load for human developers, particularly when reviewing AI generated code, and a significant source of errors for AI agents as they must be aware of the full context of a codebase not just the immediate code they are working on. With this in mind, a core design concept for AISE is to create an ecosystem where the intent and impact of code is explicitly and concisely encoded in the textual (syntactic) representation of the code and that, whenever possible, corner case semantics are elimi-nated. As we will see, by careful language design choices, we can in fact simultaneously satisfy the somewhat contradictory goals of conciseness and explicitness, and in doing so, produce a software ecosystem that is uniquely well suited to the challenges faced when managing context window sizes and attention degradation. At the same time the pursuit of this design concept leads to a software ecosystem that is resistant to a wide range of error patterns and presents lower friction for human-AI cooperation. 

## Discoverability 

Context window management and tool discovery are major chal-lenges for current AI agentic systems. There is a tension between explicitly loading anything & everything that may be relevant to a task into the context window and how aggressively to prune via document retrieval and ranking heuristics. As the number of tools and context that an agent has access to grows, it becomes increas-ingly difficult for the agent to effectively manage its context and can lead to major drops in agentic performance. This problem is not unique to transformer based AI agents, human developers also face challenges in discovering (remembering) and managing the tools and information they need to accomplish a task! From this perspective it is clear that a core design concept for AISE is to create an ecosystem that simplifies the discovery of tools and information for both human and AI agents. In addition to merely improving discoverability, we also want the ecosystem to simplify summarization tasks and explicitly support progressive disclosure. This is closely related to the previous design concept of explicit intents and impacts – by making the intent and impact of code explicit, it becomes easier for both human and AI agents to discover which tools and information are relevant for a given task. 

> arXiv:2602.20979v1 [cs.SE] 24 Feb 2026 Mark Marron

Consider an API signature wait(duration: Int) vs. the same API in a language that allows unit typed [ 22 , 28 ] primitive values, wait(duration: MilliSeconds) . The token costs of the two signatures are nearly identical, but the second signature provides critical context explicitly in the signature itself while the first requires either the initial inclusion of the documentation in the context window, the agent to make a probabilistic guess for the unit of time, or for the agent to take the additional step to read the documentation to discover this critical information. 

## Mechanize Everything 

The vision of a “Dark Factory” for software agents is a north-star for full automated Agentic coding 2. In this vision, the software ecosys-tem is mechanized to the point where agents can independently create entire applications without human intervention, operating merely from high level specifications of some form. Recent SotA results in this space have either used an existing application as an oracle ( i.e. cloning an existing application) or a full formal specification of the application ( i.e. in Lean [ 23 ] or Dafny [ 10 ]). However, the assumption of an existing application or a full formal specification 3 presents serious roadblocks to the realization of this vision at a large scale. This highlights the need to provide expressive, multi-modal and cooperative, mechanisms for specifying user/developer intent as a core concept in the AISE thinking. By integrating specification and requirements gathering as first-class parts of the system we can significantly reduce the difficulty of expressing what we want to build . By co-designing the language with a tooling ecosystem we ensure that we can then mechanically and/or cooperatively validate that the Agentic system has correctly built what was requested .

## First-Class Cooperation 

The problem of specification and requirements is not just a problem for mechanization, but also a major barrier to effective cooperation between human and AI agents. The current SotA in human-AI co-operation in software development is to have a human provide a, mostly normative, specification of what they want to build, then an AI agent attempt to build it, and then a combination of testing and manual review to determine if the agent succeeded. This process is not only inefficient but also error prone, as it relies heavily on the human’s ability to 1) write a comprehensive test suite and 2) perform careful code reviews, both of which are notoriously monotonous, difficult, and error prone tasks for human developers!. Thus a core design concept is to integrate specification and re-quirements deeply into the language and system. This involves build-ing effective multi-modal specification features into the program-ming language – for both formal and informal specifications – then building tooling to mechanize the validation of these specifications and creating workflows that provide simple/digestible feedback for a human developer to interact with.       

> 2The idea of automatic application generation is a perennial one in computer science [ 18 ,20 ,26 ] but recent excitement in the Agentic space highlights the renewed potential in this space with LLM driven systems – https://www.danshapiro.com/blog/2026/01/the-five-levels-from-spicy-autocomplete-to-the-software-factory/ and https://simonwillison.net/ 2026/Feb/7/software-factory/
> 3In practice these formal specification are often as large (or larger) and as complex [ 12 ]as the code itself!

## Failure Safety & Resilience 

Failure is an inevitable part of software development, this is true for software written by humans, and even more pressing in the context of Agentic software development, where the complexity and unpredictability of the system can lead to a wide range of failure modes. A core design concept for AISE is to create an ecosystem with multi-layered safety and resilience mechanisms. At the language level we want to eliminate common sources of errors and bugs, and to make it easier for developers to write correct code. At the system level we want to build in mechanisms for sand-boxing resources, monitoring for data exfiltration, and managing fault logging and diagnostics. These mechanisims ensure that certain class of failures are impossible, or if they do occur, are constrained to safe aborts. Beyond strict logical failures, we also consider qual-itative behavior and recovery – e.g. ensuring progress even in the case of failure, identifying resource leaks in workflows, or workflow failures resulting in inconsistent or un-revertable states. 

## Contributions 

(1) We introduce the concept of a agentic infused software ecosystem and outline the core design concepts that guide the development of this ecosystem. (2) We extend B OSQUE with features for explicit Agent & API interfaces as well as support for multi-modal intent specifi-cation (Section 3). (3) We describe a mechanized validation tool, S UNDEW , that can be used to validate the correctness of AI generated code against specifications and requirements or used online by an Agent to provide formal introspection (Section 4). (4) We outline a runtime environment, M INT , a HATEOAS [ 15 ]that provides progressive discovery as well as support for safety and resilience when executing agentic software sys-tems (Section 5). 

## 2 A Programming Language for AISE 

We begin with a review of the B OSQUE language as introduced in [ 27 ]. As noted by the authors – B OSQUE is not based on a single big feature, or even a number of small novel features, instead the value comes from a holistic process of simplification and feature selection with a single focus toward what will simplify reasoning about code – for humans, AI agents, and formal systems. At the core of B OSQUE is a let-based functional language that is focused on eliminating the complexities associated with muta-blility, aliasing, inductive-invariants, and nondeterminism. A simple BOSQUE program, Figure 1, provides a flavor of the language. The code implements a simple sign function. This code is very similar to the implementation one would expect in Java or TypeScript – in fact just eliminating the explicit ‘i’ specifier on the literals would make it valid TypeScript. This function highlights the use of multiple updates to the same variable and block structured conditional flows. B OSQUE distin-guishes between variables, let, that are fixed and those, var, that can be updated. In many languages signed numbers have asymetric ranges and thus negation is unsafe in special cases i.e. -INT_MIN 

will error or silently wrap. However, in B OSQUE the dynamic ranges for signed integers are symmetric, and aligned with their unsigned Toward an Agentic Infused Software Ecosystem               

> function sign(x: Int): Int {var y=1i; if (x <0i) {y=-1i; }return y; }

Figure 1: Example sign function in B OSQUE .

versions as well, so that negation is always safe and corner case issues with signed/unsigned conversions are eliminated. Another distinctive feature of B OSQUE is the complete elimina-tion of loops for container processing. Instead, B OSQUE provides a rich set of higher-order functions for operating on collections – similar to Java Streams or C# LINQ as shown in Figure 2.                    

> let l=List<Int>{1i, 2i, 3i}; l.allOf(pred(x) => x>= 0i) %% true l.map<Int>(fn(x) => x+1i) %% List<Int>{2i, 3i, 4i}

Figure 2: Eliminating the need for loops using higher-order functor operations in B OSQUE .

The use of higher-order functions allows for a natural, concise, and explicit way to express collection processing. Most directly the representation is strictly more token efficient than the equivalent loop-based code and we avoid the need for the agent to repeatedly generate common loop indexing and control flow, with the associated risks of off-by-one errors, incorrect variable name selection, and inverted conditions, that are regular occurrences in these types of code [ 21 ]. Thus, the use of higher-order functions (and B OSQUE )not only supports the goal of token efficiency, but also improves the probability of successful (correct) code generation! This approach also allows for a more direct and explicit expres-sion of intent. Again, from the perspective of agentic code generation, the mapping from latent intent to semantically meaningful operation names improves the likelihood of of correct operation selection and, when “reading code” enables the agent to simply focus attention on a single operation name instead of needed to analyze all compo-nents in a multiline looping implementation. Interestingly, human developers also benefit from this increased clarity when reading and reviewing code, as, they can also immediately understand the intent of the code without parsing through control flow details. For example, the use of allOf makes it clear that the intent is to check if all elements satisfy a condition, which is more explicit than a loop with a conditional check and a break statement. The final feature of B OSQUE that we highlight here is the ability to easily create strong type aliases and enforce invariants on, both aliased and composite, data values. Consider the code in Figure 3 that declares two type aliases, Fahrenheit and ZipCode , and two composite entities, TempRange and TempForecast .The code in Figure 3 shows how B OSQUE allows developers to create strong type aliases that provide explicit semantic identity to otherwise primitive values. This allows the developer, or AI agent, to express intent more clearly. For example, using Fahrenheit                        

> type Fahrenheit =Int; type ZipCode =CString of /[0-9]{5}('-'[0-9]{4})/c; entity TempRange {field low: Fahrenheit; field high: Fahrenheit; invariant $low <= $high; }entity TempForecast {field location: ZipCode; field temp: TempRange; }

Figure 3: Examples of types aliases and invariants in B OSQUE .

instead of Int makes it clear that the value represents a temperature (in Fahrenheit) and prevents unit-confusion [ 22 ] or argument con-fusion bugs [ 40 ]. As we will see in Section 5.1, this is very useful when specifying APIs where communication formats heavily use primitive values. Beyond simple type aliasing, we can also attach explicit invari-ants to both aliased and composite data types. In this example, the 

ZipCode alias uses a regular expression to declare that a ZipCode 

value is a string and to be valid it must match the specific pattern 4.Similarly, the TempRange entity declares an invariant that the low 

field must be less than or equal to the high field. These invariants can be checked at compile time or later as dynamic checks or in the SUNDEW validator. This ability to explicitly specify intent and invariant properties as part of the type system greatly enhances both the ability to reason about code and also to catch errors early in traditional development. It also provides a powerful mechanism for AI agents to generate code that is more likely to be correct, as the invariants can be used to guide both the initial generation, by making the constraints explicit for the LLM, and also used to provide feedback with failures of test-cases or static analysis systems. The validation of string structures is particularly important when APIs and data formats heavily use strings to represent structured data. Tracking the possible data content, including sensitive PII or un-sanitized user controlled input, is otherwise a difficult problem that requires reasoning over flows across the entire program. With oversights leading to potentially serious security vulnerabilities [ 34 ]like SQL injection or leaks of sensitive data. These examples highlight the core design philosophy of the BOSQUE language and how it supports the goals of AISE. By elim-inating complexity and providing powerful abstractions, B OSQUE 

enables developers and AI agents to write code that is easier to gen-erate & reason about as well as providing multi-layered support for safety & fault detection. 

## 3 Agentic B OSQUE 

Fully integrating the B OSQUE language with agents and including them a first class part of the system requires additional extensions. As currently described, B OSQUE is a general purpose programming                                                                        

> 4The regular expression language used by B OSQUE is a specialized design targeted to eliminating common forms of ReDoS attacks on validation [11] Mark Marron
> %** Transfer amt from payer account to payee account. **% api transfer(amt: USD, payer: Account, payee: Account) env={ PAYMENT_AUTHORIZATION: OAUTH_TOKEN, PAYMENT_LIMIT: USD }permissions={ \account:${payer.routing}/${payer.account}\ }requires 0.0<USD> <amt; requires amt <= env.PAYMENT_LIMIT || $events.contains(Approve{|payee=payee, amt=amt|}); ;%** *Given anatural language (plaintext) message, *compute the amount to pay and send to the payee. **% action splitBill(msg: String, payee: Account) {let amt =agent Chat::compute<Option<USD>>( env{}, msg, "What is half of the bill?" ); if(amt === none) {return fail("Could not get amount from message."); }api transfer(env{...}, amt, env.account, payee); ... }

Figure 4: Example of an api defintion and an action us-ing api and agent calls in B OSQUE to perform a pay-ment transaction – e.g. splitBill("lunch was $45.50", contacts.get("Tom")) with the expected result is a suc-cessful payment transaction of $22 .75 to Tom’s account. 

language and an excellent target for agentic code generation but lacks explicit facilities for calling and orchestrating sub-agent workflows (Section 3.1) and does not provide support for explicit decomposition and modularity of development tasks (Section 3.2). 

## 3.1 Explicit api and agent Calls 

In an agentic infused software ecosystem, we expect agents and deterministic workflows to be first class citizens in the system. Thus, we need explicit language features for agents to call workflows, workflows to call agents, and agents to call other agents. We introduce two new language constructs, api and agent , that allow for explicit calls to deterministic workflows and agents, respec-tively. The api construct supports calls to deterministic workflows that are defined elsewhere in the system or on remote (RESTful / HATEOAS) style endpoints 5. The agent construct allows for ex-plicit calls to agents that are defined elsewhere in the system. In theory these constructs could be combined into a single call con-struct but this design, with the distinction between them, allows us to provide additional language support for the more free-form textual interaction that exists with agent calls.  

> 5Section 5.1 describes the BAPI system, which provides a powerful framework us-ing B OSQUE types as a literal interchange format for calls/tools and for progressive discovery in Section 5.

Figure 4 shows an example of these constructs and how they can be used as part of a workflow that takes in a natural language message, say from an email or text with a dollar amount, splits the bill in half and then performs a payment transaction. The first step is to use a chatbot AI agent to extract the amount from the message via the Chat::compute operation. The actual implementation of this agent is entirely open, could be remote or local, and could use any number of techniques to extract the amount. The key to this design is the agent signature which allows us to export it into a B OSQUE program, and then a packaging system which links in the needed module or sets of the remote invocation 6.This api (agent ) invoke statements allows concise and explicit descriptions for what an agent should be computing and what it may access. Fundamentally, apis and agents are always operating in some context or environment. This context may include ambi-ent information, such as the current location, or in this case of Figure 4, a limit on spending. The api/agent design allows us to explicitly describe this context as part of the api/agent definition and to specify the exact values provided at invocation. In this example, the agent is explicitly given an empty environment, forbidding it from accessing (and potentially accidentally or maliciously exfil-trating) any information from the ambient context, such as a secret 

PAYMENT_AUTHORIZATION token. Additionaly, making the agent invocations explicit enables a simple syntax for converting un-structured (or semi-structured) out-puts from an AI agent into a structured format. In Figure 4 the agent is asked to compute a value for “half of the lunch bill” from a free-form string, and as it is a Chat agent, it will by default produce a free-form string output. However, the agent call explic-itly supports providing a result type shaping signature, in this case 

Option<USD> (a type alias of Decimal ). In general this can be accomplished by running the BAPI parser directly on the output of the agent, but if supported by the agent implementation, this can also be used to drive structured [ 43 ] (or even typed [ 36 ]) output generation without requiring additional data format specifications. Once the amount is extracted, the workflow uses the transfer 

API to perform the actual payment transaction. The transfer API is defined with explicit environment variables and permissions that are required to perform the transaction, as well as preconditions that must be satisfied for the transaction to be successful. The api 

specification includes the environment variables that are required for the API to function, such as the PAYMENT_AUTHORIZATION 

token and the PAYMENT_LIMIT , as well as the resources that the API will access, in this case the payer’s account information. By explicitly declaring these requirements, we ensure that the agent has the necessary context and also prevent it from accessing any information that is not explicitly provided. The API specification also includes preconditions that must be satisfied for the API call to be successful. In our example the api has the precondition that requires 0.0<USD> < amt . However, in an agentic infused software ecosystem, we also need to be able to express and check temporal properties that involve the sequence of events that occur during the execution of a system. In our example, we want to ensure that either the payment amount does not exceed   

> 6This design enables us to make agents modular, versionable, and we can support multiple side-by-side models and personas just as with code packages – i.e. NPM [37] Toward an Agentic Infused Software Ecosystem

a certain limit or that in some previous event we obtained explicit user approval event for the operation. To handle this we introduce the concept of an event log that is implicitly tracked as part of the execution of the system. This event log can be used to record any events that occur during the execution of the system, such as user interactions, API calls, or agent calls. These events are inserted into an otherwise immutable log by the system, preventing any possibility of tampering byt developers or agents, and this log can then be referenced in the pre/post conditions of API calls to check for temporal properties. In our example, we can check if the event log contains an explicit user approval event for the given item. The ability to explicitly express properties these require-ments and conditions, are a critical foundation for later mechanized validation and runtime safety. This explicit information also provides improved discovery, as critical API information is now in a structured and explicit form, which supports improved agent code generation and tool use, as the agent can directly reference the API specification to understand the requirements for successful use. Finally, this system design opens the possibility for more advanced feedback and learning systems, as the system can provide detailed information on why an API call failed, such as unsatisfied preconditions. This information can further be integrated with validation and reasoning tools into the agent’s training process via direct reinforcement learning algorithms with tools [ 8, 14 , 44 ] as well as providing immediate feedback to the agent during training rollout – allowing us to generate action rewards without a full trajectory. 

## 3.2 Holes and Meta-Thunking 

A critical problem for agentic code generation is modularity and decomposition. In traditional software development, developers can break down complex problems into smaller, more manageable tasks which can then be handed off (or deferred) for later development. This is critical for managing complexity and enabling collaboration. Strangely, programming languages do not, in general, provide ex-plicit language features to support this. Instead, developers have to rely on external tools such as issue trackers and markdown docu-ments, or use adhoc patterns such as writing incomplete functions with TODO comments and aborts to indicate that a particular task needs to be completed later. This is a major gap in the software development process, and it becomes even more problematic when we introduce agents into the mix. We have extended the B OSQUE language with an explicit hole 

construct [ 5, 19 , 45 ] that allows developers and agents to explicitly indicate that a particular task or piece of code is incomplete and needs to be filled in later. From a syntactic standpoint this provides a clear and explicit way to indicate that a particular task is incomplete, and it also allows us to provide additional metadata about the task, such as the expected input and output types, the context in which the task should be completed, and any relevant information that may be helpful for completing the task. From the standpoint of pre-training, this feature also has the potential to support explicit specialization of models for agents, architect vs. code generation, as holes are now representable by explicit tokens in the training data. Figure 5 shows an example of using the hole construct in a simple function that computes the sign of an integer. In this example,                                 

> function sign(x: Int): Int {var y=1i; if (x <0i) {y=?_ -> Int; }return y; }%** Compute the absolute value for given integer **% function abs(x: Int): Int ensures $result >= 0i; {?_absbody(examples =true); }

Figure 5: An example of using hole expressions in the sign func-tion to indicate that the implementation of the negative number case is incomplete. The hole expression can be a simple un-named expression, with a desired type, or alternatively, can include a doc-comment, a name, and even information on where to find desired input/output examples. 

we have implemented the positive and zero cases, but the logic to complete the negative case left as an expression-hole. By using the 

hole construct, we can explicitly indicate that this part of the code is incomplete and needs to be completed later – without requiring additional annotations or assertion style hacks. The final part of Figure 5 uses a hole for the entire function body and, using the post-condition, can specify the expected behavior of the implementation along with the docstring and examples for the hole to further specify the desired behavior. This is a powerful way to provide explicit specifications for the desired behavior of the code, and as shown in Section 4, can be used to symbolically validate the behavior of any generated implementation. This explicit support for modularity and decomposition is critical for agentic code generation, as it allows agents to break down com-plex problems into smaller, more manageable tasks that can then be completed later, either by the same agent or by a different agent. It also provides a standard structure for embedding additional meta-information about the task which enables improved discovery and more effective code generation. The direct integration also enables integration into development tools and runtimes. For example, we can trivially link in the concept of Prorogued Programming [ 1] or and LLM extended version of meta-thunking. In this design, when a hole is executed, instead of throwing an error, the system can automatically trigger a call to a human devel-oper or agent to complete the hole. In this workflow, the human (or agent) can manually specify the correct result type, in our case if the value of x is -5 , we would provide -1i . In later executions, the system can use these as memoized results for the hole, and if there is an examples file, can load/store these examples for later reference – as unit tests or guides for an agent during code generation. Mark Marron 

## 4 Mechanized Understanding and Validation in AISE 

In contrast to other widely used languages 7 where the semantics are not amenable to mechanized analysis, due to features like loops, mu-tability, and non-deterministic behaviors, or languages like Lean [ 23 ]and Dafny [ 10 ] that provide support for full functional verification but require substantial proof engineering expertise, B OSQUE is de-signed to support fully-mechanized reasoning and validation. 

## 4.1 Mechanized Understanding and Validation 

As described by the B OSQUE developers [ 17 ], the design of B OSQUE 

enables us to map it, almost entirely, to efficiently decidable theories supported by a SAT-Module-Theory (SMT) solver [ 24 ]. Operations on numbers, data-types, and functions all map to core decidable the-ories – Integers, Bitvectors, Constructors, Uninterpreted Functions, and Interpreted Functions. In SMT solvers the theories of Strings and Sequences are semi-decision procedures in the unbounded case. However, we can bound the sizes of these kinds as inputs and then the system becomes fully (and efficiently) decidable. As a result validation can be fully automated. There is no need for developers to learn an additional proof language, all checks are encoded as assertions, pre/post-conditions, and invariants in the B OSQUE pro-gramming language, and no manual intervention is required to write lemmas or diagnose proof failures! Given this design, consider the sample sign function from Fig-ure 1 and the resulting SMTLib [ 9] encoding, Figure 6. This code is a fully decidable translation encoding of the B OSQUE version.               

> (define-fun sign ((x Int)) Int (let ((y 1)) (ite (< x0) (let ((y -1)) y) y) ))

Figure 6: Sign function automatically converted into SMTLib. 

The B OSQUE language includes builtin support for various valida-tion workflows using this encoding strategy, including a specialized declaration of a parametric property test. A simple validation test that checks that the sign function returns a value in the range [− 1, 1]

for any input ( x) is shown in Figure 7. For a simple property like this the S UNDEW validator can show that the property holds for all inputs and takes 7ms to complete.               

> chktest signRange(x: Int): Bool {let sgn =sign(x); assert -1i <= sgn && sgn <= 1i; }

Figure 7: Example validation harness for sign function return range ( ∈ [− 1, 1]) in B OSQUE .

The S UNDEW validator is also able to go over a small application and check, for each possible runtime or user defined error, that either the error is impossible or that it can be triggered – and also generate a witness input. 

> 7A notable exception is Morgan-Stanley’s Morphir [17, 35].

## 4.2 SUNDEW : Workflow Validation 

We can extend this approach to support the event log and associated pre/post conditions on APIs and Agent calls from Section 3.1. In these systems the event log is simply an implicit parameter that is passed, and from the viewpoint on the SMT encoding is simply a 

Sequence of events. Consider the example request for an agent to look at the con-tents of msg and determine what “half of the bill” was as shown in Figure 4. This code shows a hypothetical agent generated script to accomplish the task. This script uses an LLM agent to process the semi-structured text in the payment request msg to determine the amount to pay, and attempts to transfer the payment. If the 

Chat::compute action were unlucky 8, or the lunch was partic-ularly expensive, this computed amount could be large enough to exceed the payment limit of the user. The M INT runtime system (Section 5) will catch this error at runtime, with a precondition failure, but we can also statically run symbolic validation on this script to detect that the amt value may exceed the payment limit and that the, otherwise required, user confirmation check is missing! Unlike test case generation feedback which is simply a pointwise failing test and can also cause the agent to focus on details of the test case and over-fit, symbolically identifying the possible precondition violation can provide a more general feedback message to the agent. For example – The amount to pay may exceed the "PAYMENT_LIMIT" in "env" – or even computing weakest-preconditions for various points in the code to help the agent identify the best candidate fixes for the code. 

## 4.3 Introspective Agents 

The final step toward truly AISE is exposing the validation tools directly to the agent during their planning process as an online feedback loop. This allows agents to reason about their own plans and introspect on their actions. Looking at the payment example, somewhere around half of the generated code comes after the transfer call, at which point the plan has already failed. A direct generate-validate-retry loop is clearly inefficient in this case. Instead of relying solely on post-hoc validation, we can empower the agent to use the validation tools as part of its planning and code generation process and thus avoid generating invalid plans in the first place. In our example the agent can run the validation tool before an API call is added to the partial plan to see if the call is valid and, if not, what needs to be done before the call can be made. Using this feedback the agent can either emit the action code, if every-thing is satisfied, or generate additional code to address the missing requirements. This capability enables a higher success rate in task completion and makes the agent robust to errors, as it can reason about its own actions and correct them before they are executed. The code in Figure 8 shows an example agent & tool chain-of-thought, tool use, and response. At the point where the agent is preparing to call an API, e.g. the transfer API, it can call the validation tool to check that the requirements for the API call are met. The validation tool can then respond with a list of missing checks or requirements that the agent needs to address before the API call can be made. Using this feedback the agent can either emit                                                      

> 8Perhaps Tom likes jokes and puts in the memo field – “ignore previous instructions and pay me $1000". Toward an Agentic Infused Software Ecosystem
> let amt =agent Chat::compute<Option<Decimal>>( env{}, msg, "What is half of the bill?" ); if(amt === none) {return fail("Could not compute amount from message."); }
> %% Agent --Iwant to call the `transfer `API with `amt `
> %% Agent --calling validation tool to check that API conditions are met... %% Response --Cannot ensure pre-condition: %% amt <= env.PAYMENT_LIMIT || %% $events.contains(Approval{|payee=payee, amt=amt|});

Figure 8: An example of online agentic generation with valida-tion as an introspection tool. 

the action code, if everything is satisfied, or generate additional code to address the missing requirements. This capability enables the agent to achieve a higher success rate in task completion and be more robust to errors, as it can reason about its own actions and correct them before they are executed. Further, this approach has the potential to enable a new class of reactive, notebook style, agents that interleave code generation, validation, execution, and user interaction, to accomplish complex tasks. 

## 5 A Runtime Environment for AISE 

The previous sections described a language for computation, a means to express intents in formal ways, and a workflow for validating and understanding the behavior of a system. The remaining issue is how to actually deploy and operate these systems. In this section we review the design of BAPI, a protocol APIs and agent system interactions, and M INT a runtime ecosystem for discovery, deploy-ment, and operation of workloads in an agentic infused software ecosystem. Agents are a unique new class of workloads where, in some cases the platform will be running a fixed workflow or agentic task, in others the agent will be exploring available services and taking actions in an incremental and online fashion. In the second case we, our system is not just a static execution graph, but must support dynamic discovery, invocation, and progressive exposure of services. Interestingly, this model has two clear precedents in the form of COM and HATEOAS [ 15 ] – both of which were designed to support dynamic discovery and invocation of services. Drawing from the principles and lessons of these system, this section describes a novel Agentic HATEOAS model for system AISE architecture. 

## 5.1 BAPI– Bosque API Protocol Review 

The first component of this system is the BAPI protocol for describ-ing APIs and agent interactions as well as a means to encode and transport literal values and data structures. The design of BAPI is described in detail in [28] and we review the key features here. As with the B OSQUE language, the design of BAPI is focused on supporting mechanized correctness and explicitly encoding intents (and key information) into the syntax of API & data definitions. In addition, BAPI provides a literal syntax for encoding data that is                                                          

> %** Definition of an Order type w/ sensitive TIN **% type OrderId =CString of /[A-Z][0-9]+$/; sensitive type TIN =CString of /[0-9]{9}$/; entity Order {orderid: OrderId; amount: Decimal; customer: TIN; }%** Literal Order (Complete Form) **% Order{ orderid ='A53'<OrderId>, amount =45.50d, customer ='123456789'<TIN> }%** Literal Order (Token Minimized Form) **% Order{ 'A53', 45.50d, '123456789' }%** Literal Order (Standard Form w/ Leakage Filter) **% Order{ 'A53'<OrderId>, 45.50d, '*********'<TIN> }%** Literal Order (JSON) **% Order{ "orderId": "A53", "amount": 45.50, "customer": "123456789" }

Figure 9: Example of an Order type definition and 3 literal value representation in BAPI, complete, token minimized, and with sensitive leakage filtering applied – plus the automatically generated JSON equivalent representation. 

more efficient (token-wise) than JSON, is fully round-tripable, and designed to be easily authored by humans (or AI agents). BAPI specifications are a extension of the B OSQUE type system. A simple example of a BAPI specification is shown in Figure 9. The BAPI specification defines a set of types that make up a customer 

Order . The first declaration is a simple type alias for an OrderId 

that is a structured string (matching a regular expression) while the second declaration is for a sensitive type for a TIN (Taxpayer Identification Number). The second declaration shows how BAPI supports information control and monitoring by explicitly marking data as sensitive so that later uses and operations on the data can be mechanically checked for compliance or security risks. These two alias are then used in the composite Order type that also includes an amount field. Finally, the example shows various BAPI options for serializing literal Order values. All of these forms + parsers and serializers are automatically generated from the type definitions and the choice of which form to use is up to the user (or agent) based on the needs of the scenario. By design they can Mark Marron 

be intermixed in the same system and are amenable to linear time processing and can be stream/zero-alloc parsed. In the first form, the literal value is fully annotated with type information. This form is ideal for mechanized reasoning and valida-tion of the data but, like JSON, is verbose and can involve massive redundancies in property names (or other tags) which increases to-ken load and message sizes. The second form is a token-minimized encoding that relies on the order of fields in the type definition to avoid repeating tags and type information. This form is ideal for efficient encoding and transport of data. The ability to use (and intermix) both forms allows users and agents to work with high-information representations for conve-nience, or when feeding (small) results of a tool-call into an agent context, while using a token-minimized form for transport, storage, or losslessly compacting large values for agent context management. The third form is the same as the first form but with a leakage filter 

automatically applied to the TIN field which was marked sensitive. This form is the default for emitting data in scenarios like logging or crash dumps. This minimizes the risk of side-channel leakage and, if working in an untrusted agent, provides a means to guarantee sensitive information cannot be leaked. The final form is the JSON representation that is automatically generated from the type definition. This allows interop with other systems and tools even if they do not support BAPI natively. By design, the JSON form is fully round-trippable with the encodings that avoid common NaN , MAX_SAFE_INTEGER , date format, etc. 

handling issues. This allows our AISE stack to work seamlessly with existing tools and systems while enjoying the benefits of the more efficient BAPI specification and literal formats. 

## 5.2 Info Routes and Progressive Discovery 

The original formulation of REST and HATEOAS [ 15 ] envisioned systems where the description of the platform capabilities was inline with the ability to dispatch these operations. Further, that a user could discover and progressively explore details of these capabilities and how to invoke them. However, modern service based architectures and platforms, draw-ing from the heritage of programming languages, split the executable artifact from the documentation and APIs. Further, our objective in-volves supporting multiple modes of interaction with a single logical service, i.e. both BAPI (Verbose, Minimal, or even Binary Encoded) and JSON. In addition we want to provide build and deployment systems that declaratively generate all of the appropriate bindings, set the needed routes, setup “well known” names for discoverability, provide integrated search, and are optimized for agentic interaction. To support this we introduce a novel runtime platform, M INT , to handle the configuration and execution of agentic infused software ecosystem services. A deployed M INT server is setup around a BAPI configuration file that specifies routes based on URI globs. Each route may be a static file (for simple resources) or connected to a B OSQUE task, and of course middleware options for logging, authorization, and request/response meta-data management – very similar to popu-lar frameworks like express.js [ 13 ]. The M INT server can also au-tomatically setup support for multiple encodings (Verbose, Min-imal, Binary, JSON) along with special routes for discovery and info. By convention M INT sets a top-level route named /actions 

that returns a compact structured specification of all of the end-points available on the server, filtered by the permissions of the caller, which include signatures of the handlers, pre/post conditions and documentation comments. Each endpoint is also setup with a /actions/{endpoint} route that returns more detailed in-formation about the endpoint including normative usage patterns, examples, URI links to related resources, and more detailed docu-mentation. This allows for M INT to satisfy the primary use cases of systems like MCP [ 3] or Skills [ 38 ] including autonomous & pro-gressive discovery of the capabilities of the service in a structured, secure, and efficient manner. To further support agentic use cases, M INT also sets up a /search 

route that accepts a query, as plain text, and is intended to facilitate semantic search over the service’s capabilities and related infor-mation. By default, the search route is implemented to perform a structured semantic search over the specifications of the endpoints and documents but the design of M INT allows for this to be cus-tomized and to include links to other related services or resources (e.g. package manager or websites). This allows agents to ask ques-tions about the service without prior knowledge and autonomously obtain relevant information for a task without. This opinionated design ensures a standardized way to discover the features and functionality a M INT service provides. The struc-tured B OSQUE specifications that are returned ensure that an agent can mechanistically understand the usage of a given feature and the ability to incrementally query for more details allows for the provi-sion of detailed information, use examples, and normative patterns without overwhelming the agent context. Further, by integrating search as a dedicated route we can support powerful agentic work-flows with a strong seperation of concerns – specifically the agent is responsible for deciding what concepts are relevant to the task at hand while the M INT runtime is responsible determining the best way to find and return relevant information. 

## 5.3 Exposure, Sandboxing, and Guard-Rails for Agentic Workloads 

Once we are running agentic workloads we need to manage the unique security and operational challenges they present. Again our system is able to leverage the design of B OSQUE and BAPI to mechanistically understand the behavior of these workloads and monitor them for compliance and security. The first level of protection is via the BAPI specifications them-selves. Each API specifies the types of data it accepts and returns, including information on sensitive data. Thus, M INT automatically checks that sensitive data is not sent over an public endpoint (by default all endpoints are private) and private endpoints can also be flagged as no-sensitive (or specific levels). This allows for immediate linting of endpoints that may publicly expose sensitive data and also allows for analysis of any workflow to determine if it can access sensitive data, and if so, what data and what the potential risks are. For example, when an agent accesses and endpoint with sensitive data, the runtime can automatically quarantine any outputs from that agent which may now be tainted with sensitive details. In addition to monitoring data-flows and sensitivity, the M INT 

runtime also automatically sandboxes execution based on the URI Toward an Agentic Infused Software Ecosystem 

resources it has declared it will access. In Figure 4 the transfer 

task is declared to access the account resource for the payee alone. Thus, the implementation is unable to, maliciously, access the ballance or or move money from the payer’s account. This technique can also be applied to any resource that is mappable to a URI, for example using the glob syntax to whitelist a certain set of REST resources to prevent data exfiltration to an unauthorized endpoint or prohibiting access outside of the file:///tmp/app_name/ 

folder to allow intermediate files to be written/read while ensuring that user data is not accessed. This ensures that even if an agent is compromised or behaves maliciously, it cannot access resources outside of its declared scope. While the idea of sandboxing is well known, the key insight here is using URIs and Globs as the means of resource specification and sandboxing. As opposed to the historical use of custom resource types and access languages [ 2, 16 , 39 ] which have, historically, been difficult to standardize, understand, and use, URIs and globs natu-rally match the model of resources used in RESTful systems. This allows for a simple, uniform, and powerful way to specify and en-force resource access policies across a wide variety of resource types (files, REST endpoints, databases, etc. ) without needing custom plugins or extensions for each type. Finally, the M INT runtime also provides a dynamic monitoring and enforcement system for agentic workloads. As B OSQUE and the BAPI specifications efficiently executable pre/post condition, invariants, and assertions, these can all be monitored and enforced at runtime by the M INT system. Failures of any of these conditions trig-gers a safe-abort of the offending task, and can be configured to trig-ger additional mitigation such as rolling back state changes, logging relevant data, and even producing a offline time-travel-debuggable dump [ 4]. This provides a powerful line of defense against misbehav-ing agents. This multi-layered and explicit approach to security and safety implies that, even if a malicious actor is able to exploit and work around one layer of protection, then they are still limited by the additional layers either blocking the exploit or forcing attackers to find multiple bypasses for an exploit to chain. 

## 6 Discussion 

A key question is whether, in the future, a sufficiently powerful AGI agent will even need or benefit from the features of the agentic infused software ecosystem or if, by sufficient training and power, it will be able to operate on any language/platform? Consider a hypothetical limit where we assume that an eventual AGI agent is as capable as an expert human developer, top 10% in the world, then we can answer this question by asking the analogous question of whether this expert would be aided by the features outlined in this work. The answer is yes, they would, and in fact, for many of the features we have outlined part of the description and motivation is how it eliminates or helps with problems real developers have today. When going for three (or more) 9’s of reliability then even small possibilities for failure ( 1% or less) are unacceptable as, at this level, almost any mistake would exceed the failure budget. Would we accept a 1% chance that an agent would stop paying our mortgage, delete a customer database, post medical information to a public forum? Thus, when working to build highly reliable and trustworthy agents we need to have multiple overlapping layers to drive reliability and it is ill-advised to forgo any possible advantage. The converse question is whether the design and principles out-lined here are overfit for the current state of the art in LLMs and attention-based models. When these models change or are replaced with new architectures will the design of this system become obso-lete or even a hindrance? As with the previous question, the first response is to again con-sider the hypothetical limit of replacing an LLM with an expert human developer. Again we see that, the principles outlined here are not specific to attention-based models or LLMs, but generalize to humans, as well as earlier (simpler) program synthesis systems ( e.g. 

NLyze [19]). Additionally, the system design is set to allow agents to be swapped out transparently. Features like the agent invokes are explicitly designed to avoid committing to plain text as arguments and the S UNDEW verifier work with any code regardless of who/what produced it. In practice an agent could be a human in the loop and the proposed AISE would still be effective and coherent. Thus, the pro-posed design will remain viable and effective even as the underlying technology evolves. 

## 7 Related Work 

Agentic Programming Languages: Despite the major role that programming language design plays in the capabilities of AI agents, there has been relatively little investigation into programming lan-guage design specifically for agentic software development. The most substantial work in this space is by Marron [ 27 , 28 ] and Mei-jer [ 30 – 32 ] who have both proposed designs focused on the issue of how programming language design impact the capabilities of AI programming and Agentic systems. To the best of our knowledge the Universalis language (Meijer) has not been made publicly avail-able or been formally described. The B OSQUE language, as well as the extensions in this work (see data availability statement), are fully open-source [ 6] and all development is publicly accessible. The extensions in this work go far beyond the state of the art in either system, bringing the design from a core PL or tool, into a full ecosystem including deployment and orchestration. 

Verifiable AI Programming: The topic of verifiable AI program-ming has been a large focus of research in the formal methods community, with significant work on using languages like Lean [ 23 ]and Dafny [ 10 ] to formally specify and verify the correctness AI generated code. These systems have shown promise in verifying the correctness of AI generated code, but they also demonstrate the limits of existing tooling, particularly in terms of the complexity and size of the specifications required. In practice the current state of the art for verified AI program synthesis is limited to small, self contained programs leet-code style problems [ 25 , 33 , 46 , 48 , 49 ], and even then, the specifications are often as large (or larger) and as complex [ 12 ] as the code itself. These challenges highlight the need for simplified (partial correctness focused) specification languages, multi-modal support, and scalable mechanized validation tools as core components of the AISE vision. 

Specification and Cooperation: The problem of specification and requirements gathering is a major challenge for effective cooperation Mark Marron 

between human and AI agents in software development. Of particu-lar interest in this space is prior work on multi-modal specification and interaction with End-User Programming [ 18 , 41 ] systems, such as FlashFill [ 18 ] and Nlyze [ 19 ], and prorogued programming [ 1], which have shown promise in allowing users to provide specifi-cations in a variety of forms. Related work by Gulwani et.al has investigated the use of examples and demonstrations as a form of specification for AI agents [ 29 ], which is a promising direction for reducing the difficulty of expressing intents (specifications) and for iterating on with AI agents in a cooperative manner. The AISE vision builds on this prior work by integrating multi-modal specification and validation deeply into the language and providing a platform for new UX and interaction paradigms for human-AI cooperation in software development. 

Agentic Systems: Recent work on long-horizon agentic systems and tool use, such as AppWorld [ 47 ], LOOP [ 8] and ToolFormer [ 42 ], have demonstrated the potential of AI agents to perform complex tasks over extended periods of time. However, these systems also highlight the challenges of context management and tool discovery, as well as the need for robust failure handling and recovery mecha-nisms as, with more complex tasks, the unaugmented success rates are at 70% for simpler tasks but dropping off rapidly to the 45% range for more complex (longer horizon) tasks that involve more complex API (tool) use. This work provides a complimentary set of contri-butions – in the form of language design, mechanized validation, and runtime features – that are designed to work in conjunction with improvements in raw agentic capabilities to create a more robust and effective ecosystem for agentic software development. 

## 8 Onward! 

This paper outlined the vision and core design concepts for an agen-tic infused software ecosystem, and describes the key components of this system, from the programming language to the mechanized vali-dation tool to the runtime environment. Our approach to the problem of creating effective and trustworthy agentic software systems is to take a holistic approach to the entire software stack, co-designing the language, tools, and runtime environment to work together in a synergistic manner. As shown in this work, this approach is crit-ical to addressing the challenges of context management, api/tool discovery, specification and requirements gathering, code/action gen-eration, and safety that are critical to the success of agentic software systems. By advancing the state of the art in these areas, and address-ing key limitations to current agentic deployment, we can create a software ecosystem that significantly increases the feasibility, and drives widespread adoption, of agentic software systems. 

## Data Availability 

Experimental versions of all of the systems described in this paper are publicly available via the main B OSQUE github repository https: //github.com/BosqueLanguage. These systems are actively being integrated and converted into a production ready system that brings the agentic infused software ecosystem to developers (and users) everywhere. 

## References 

[1] Mehrdad Afshari, Earl T. Barr, and Zhendong Su. 2012. Liberating the Program-mer with Prorogued Programming. In Onward! 

[2] Paschal C. Amusuo, Kyle A. Robinson, Tanmay Singla, Huiyun Peng, Aravind Machiry, Santiago Torres-Arias, Laurent Simon, and James C. Davis. 2025. ZT-DJAVA: Mitigating Software Supply Chain Vulnerabilities via Zero-Trust De-pendencies (Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM 47th International Conference on Software Engineering) .[3] Anthropic. 2024. Model Context Protocol. https://www.anthropic.com/news/ model-context-protocol. [4] Earl T. Barr, Mark Marron, Ed Maurer, Dan Moseley, and Gaurav Seth. 2016. Time-travel Debugging for JavaScript/Node.Js (FSE) .[5] Andrew Blinn, Xiang Li, June Hyung Kim, and Cyrus Omar. 2024. Statically Contextualizing Large Language Models with Typed Holes (OOPSLA) .[6] Bosque Source 2024. Bosque Programming Language. https://github.com/ BosqueLanguage/. [7] Frederick P. Brooks, Jr. 1987. No Silver Bullet Essence and Accidents of Software Engineering. Computer 20 (1987). [8] Kevin Chen, Marco Cusumano-Towner, Brody Huval, Aleksei Petrenko, Jackson Hamburger, Vladlen Koltun, and Philipp Krähenbühl. 2025. Reinforcement Learning for Long-Horizon Interactive LLM Agents. arXiv:2502.01600 [cs.LG] https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.01600 [9] Clark Barrett, Pascal Fontaine, and Cesare Tinelli 2025. SMT-LIB Standard: Version 2.7. https://smt-lib.org/papers/smt-lib-reference-v2.7-r2025-07-07.pdf. [10] Dafny Source 2024. Dafny Programming Language. https://dafny.org/. [11] James C. Davis, Christy A. Coghlan, Francisco Servant, and Dongyoon Lee. 2018. The Impact of Regular Expression Denial of Service (ReDoS) in Practice: An Empirical Study at the Ecosystem Scale (ESEC/FSE 2018) .[12] Dodds, Mike 2025. What Works (and Doesn’t) Selling Formal Methods. https: //www.galois.com/articles/what-works-and-doesnt-selling-formal-methods. [13] Express.js 2019. Documentation. https://expressjs.com/. [14] Jiazhan Feng, Shijue Huang, Xingwei Qu, Ge Zhang, Yujia Qin, Baoquan Zhong, Chengquan Jiang, Jinxin Chi, and Wanjun Zhong. 2025. ReTool: Reinforcement Learning for Strategic Tool Use in LLMs. arXiv:2504.11536 [cs.CL] https: //arxiv.org/abs/2504.11536 [15] Roy Thomas Fielding. 2000. Architectural Styles and the Design of Network-Based Software Architectures . Ph. D. Dissertation. [16] FreeBSD Foundation. 2024. Introduction to FreeBSD Jails. https:// freebsdfoundation.org/freebsd-project/resources/introduction-to-freebsd-jails/. [17] Stephen Goldbaum, Attila Mihaly, Tosha Ellison, Earl T. Barr, and Mark Marron. 2022. High Assurance Software for Financial Regulation and Business Platforms 

(VMCAI) .[18] Sumit Gulwani. 2011. Automating String Processing in Spreadsheets Using Input-Output Examples. In POPL .[19] Sumit Gulwani and Mark Marron. 2014. NLyze: Interactive Programming by Natural Language for Spreadsheet Data Analysis and Manipulation. In SIGMOD .[20] Sumit Gulwani, Oleksandr Polozov, and Rishabh Singh. 2017. Program Synthesis. 

Foundations and Trends Programming Languages (2017). [21] Rafael-Michael Karampatsis and Charles Sutton. 2020. How Often Do Single-Statement Bugs Occur? The ManySStuBs4J Dataset (MSR) .[22] Andrew Kennedy. 2009. Types for Units-of-Measure: Theory and Practice 

(CEFP) .[23] Lean Source 2024. Lean Programming Language. https://lean-lang.org/. [24] Leonardo de Moura and Nikolaj Bjørner 2024. Z3 SMT Theorem Prover. https: //github.com/Z3Prover/z3. [25] Chloe Loughridge, Qinyi Sun, Seth Ahrenbach, Federico Cassano, Chuyue Sun, Ying Sheng, Anish Mudide, Md Rakib Hossain Misu, Nada Amin, and Max Tegmark. 2024. DafnyBench: A Benchmark for Formal Software Verification. arXiv:2406.08467 [cs.SE] https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.08467 [26] Zohar Manna and Richard Waldinger. 1980. A Deductive Approach to Program Synthesis. ACM Transactions on Programming Language Systems (1980). [27] Mark Marron. 2023. Toward Programming Languages for Reasoning: Humans, Symbolic Systems, and AI Agents (Onward!) .[28] Mark Marron. 2024. A Programming Language for Data and Configuration! 

(Onward!) .[29] Mikaël Mayer, Gustavo Soares, Maxim Grechkin, Vu Le, Mark Marron, Olek-sandr Polozov, Rishabh Singh, Benjamin Zorn, and Sumit Gulwani. 2015. User Interaction Models for Disambiguation in Programming by Example. In UIST .[30] Erik Meijer. 2025. From Function Frustrations to Framework Flexibility. Commun. ACM (2025). [31] Erik Meijer. 2025. Unleashing the Power of End-User Programmable AI. Commun. ACM (2025). [32] Erik Meijer. 2026. Guardians of the Agents. Commun. ACM (2026). [33] Md Rakib Hossain Misu, Cristina V. Lopes, Iris Ma, and James Noble. 2024. Towards AI-Assisted Synthesis of Verified Dafny Methods. ACM on Software Engineering (2024). Toward an Agentic Infused Software Ecosystem 

[34] MITRE. 2024. CWE-25: Top 25 Most Dangerous Software Weaknesses. https: //cwe.mitre.org/top25/archive/2024/2024_cwe_top25.html Accessed: 2024-04-08. [35] Morphir 2021. Morphir. https://github.com/finos/morphir. [36] Niels Mündler, Jingxuan He, Hao Wang, Koushik Sen, Dawn Song, and Martin Vechev. 2025. Type-Constrained Code Generation with Language Models (PLDI) .[37] NPM 2023. npm.js. https://www.npmjs.com/. [38] OpenAI. 2024. Skills. https://developers.openai.com/api/docs/guides/tools-skills/. [39] Oracle. 2024. Java Platform, The Security Manager. https://docs.oracle.com/ javase/tutorial/essential/environment/security.html. [40] Andrew Rice, Edward Aftandilian, Ciera Jaspan, Emily Johnston, Michael Pradel, and Yulissa Arroyo-Paredes. 2017. Detecting Argument Selection Defects. Pro-ceedings ACM Programming Languages (2017). [41] C. Rich and R.C. Waters. 1988. Automatic programming: myths and prospects. 

Computer (1988). [42] Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessì, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Luke Zettlemoyer, Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. 2023. Toolformer: Language Models Can Teach Themselves to Use Tools. arXiv:2302.04761 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.04761 [43] Torsten Scholak, Nathan Schucher, and Dzmitry Bahdanau. [n. d.]. PICARD: Parsing Incrementally for Constrained Auto-Regressive Decoding from Language Models. In EMNLP .[44] Joykirat Singh, Raghav Magazine, Yash Pandya, and Akshay Nambi. 2025. Agentic Reasoning and Tool Integration for LLMs via Reinforcement Learn-ing. arXiv:2505.01441 [cs.AI] https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.01441 [45] Armando Solar-Lezama, Gilad Arnold, Liviu Tancau, Rastislav Bodik, Vijay Saraswat, and Sanjit Seshia. 2007. Sketching Stencils (PLDI) .[46] Chuyue Sun, Ying Sheng, Oded Padon, and Clark Barrett. 2024. Clover: Closed-Loop Verifiable Code Generation (SAIV) .[47] Harsh Trivedi, Tushar Khot, Mareike Hartmann, Ruskin Manku, Vinty Dong, Edward Li, Shashank Gupta, Ashish Sabharwal, and Niranjan Balasubramanian. 2024. AppWorld: A Controllable World of Apps and People for Benchmarking Interactive Coding Agents (ACL) .[48] Haoxin Tu, Huan Zhao, Yahui Song, Mehtab Zafar, Ruijie Meng, and Abhik Roychoudhury. 2025. Agentic Program Verification. arXiv:2511.17330 [cs.SE] https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.17330 [49] Zhe Ye, Zhengxu Yan, Jingxuan He, Timothe Kasriel, Kaiyu Yang, and Dawn Song. 2025. VERINA: Benchmarking Verifiable Code Generation. arXiv:2505.23135 [cs.LG] https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.23135