Title: Microsoft Word - SSEL_V4.docx

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.07334v1

Published Time: Tue, 10 Mar 2026 00:55:38 GMT

Number of Pages: 49

Markdown Content:
# SelfвҖ‘Supervised Evolutionary Learning of Neurodynamic Progression and 

# Identity Manifolds from EEG During SafetyвҖ‘Critical Decision Making 

Xiaoshan Zhou , S.M. ASCE 1, Carol C. Menassa, F. ASCE 2*, and Vineet R. Kamat, F. ASCE 3

> 1

Ph.D. Candidate, Dept. of Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann 

Arbor, MI, 48109 -2125. Email: xszhou@umich.edu 

> 2

Professor, Dept. of Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of Mic higan, Ann Arbor, MI, 

48109 -2125 . Email: menassa@umich.edu 

> 3

Professor, Dept. of Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, 

48109 -2125. Email: vkamat@umich.edu 

* Corresp onding author 

Abstract 

Human вҖ“vehicle interaction in safetyвҖ‘critical traffic environments increa singly incorporates neural 

sensing to infer user intent and cognitive state, yet most existing approaches either treat 

electroencephalography (EEG) as a static biometric credential or train taskвҖ‘specific decoders that 

ignore longвҖ‘term neurodynamic trajecto ries. These paradigms lack mechanisms to jointly achieve 

cybersecure user identity and continual modeling of evolving cognitive states during interaction. 

This work proposes a selfвҖ‘sup ervised evolutionary learning (SSEL) framework that discovers 

individual ized neurodynamic progressions and intrinsic identity manifolds directly from 

continuous EEG, without external labels or predefined cognitive stage models. SSEL jointly 

optimizes within -stage tempo ral predictability , boundary contrast , crossвҖ‘trial alignment , and sparse 

stageвҖ‘specific feature weights, while a populationвҖ‘based evolutionary search enables direct 

optimization in the discrete , nonвҖ‘differentiable space of candidate segmentations. We validate the 

framework on EEG recorded from participants performing a simulated roadвҖ‘crossing decision task, 

a canonical safetyвҖ‘critical scenario in which perceptual assessment, risk evaluation, and decision 

commitment unfold over time. The learned segmentations reveal stable, personвҖ‘specific stage 

structures and neurodynamic signatures that support authentication and anomaly detection, while 

maintaining consistency across heterogeneous traffi c scenarios . Compared to inferenceвҖ‘based 

temporal segmentation baselines, including Bayesian online changeвҖ‘point detection, kernelвҖ‘based 

inference, and Pruned Exact Linear Time, SSEL achieves ordersвҖ‘ofвҖ‘magnitude higher boundary 

contra st, substantial gains in crossвҖ‘trial generalization of intention boundar ies, and more 

interpretable, sparse stageвҖ‘wise feature attributions. Beyond performance, the framework advances 

a progressionвҖ‘aware perspective on cognitive neurodyna mics, where security, resilience, and 

personalization emerge from the intrinsic temporal structure of brain activity , with implications for 

next -generation smart urban and transportation infrastructures. 

Keywords: Self -Supervise d Learning, Evolutionary Computation, EEG Segmentation ,

Metacognition , Human -Robot Interaction, Secure Cyber -Physical Systems 1 Introduction 

Cognition unfolds in time. Perception, evaluation, deliberation, and action are not instantaneous 

events, but structured neurodynamic processes that evolve through latent trajectories in high -

dimensional neural state space (Wang, 2012) . Across a wide range of tasks , such as pe rceptual 

discrimination, working memory, motor planning, and decision making , the brain transitions 

through relatively stable yet transient regimes often conceptual ized as stages, states, or metastable 

attractors (Tognoli & Kel so, 2014) . Understanding how such stages emerge, how they are 

organized temporally, and how they vary across individuals remains a central challenge in 

cognitive neuroscience (Luo et al., 2025; Parr et al., 2024) .

Electroencephalography (EEG), with its millisecond -scale temporal resolution, provides a

powerful window into these evolving neurodynamic processes (Jorge et al., 2014) . Yet most EEG 

analysis paradigms remain fundamentally static in orientation. Classical approac hes detect 

condition -dependent differences between predefined intervals (M ahini et al., 2020) , while modern 

machine learning methods decode externally labeled states such as motor imagery, emotional 

category, or ta sk condition (Weng et al., 2025) . Even when sophisticated de ep learning 

architectures are employed, the focus is typically on classifying predefined labels or predicting 

behavioral outcomes (Liu et al., 2025; Saibene et al., 2024) , rather than discovering the intrinsic 

temp oral structure of neural activity itself. 

This creates a methodological gap. If cognition is inherently progressive and stage -like, then 

computational models should be capable of uncovering latent stage boundaries and individualized 

neurodynamic trajectori es directly from continuous neural time series without relying on 

externally imposed annotations. However, such latent structures are not directly observable. They 

are embedded within noisy, high -dimensional EEG signals and must be inferred from the intern al 

regularities of temporal dynamics rather than prescribed through behavioral labels. 

Self -supervised learning (SSL) offers a principled alternative to traditional supervised paradigms 

by deriving learning signals from the structure of the data itself. In domains such as vision and 

language, SSL has demonstrated remarkable success in learning transferable representations 

through contrastive, predictive, or reconstruction -based objectives (Zhang et al., 2025a) . More 

recently, SSL has been applied to EEG to reduce dependence on labeled data. Nevertheless, most 

EEG -SSL approaches rem ain downstream -oriented (Deldari et al., 2022) : representations are 

evaluated by their ability to improve classification of externally defined tasks, rather than by their 

capaci ty to reveal the intrinsic neurodynamic organization of cognition. 

In particular, existing frameworks rarely treat temporal segmentation as the primary object of 

inference. Ins tead, segmentation , if performed at all , is window -based, threshold -driven, or d erived 

from statistical change -point detection methods that test for distributional shifts (Aminikhanghahi 

& Cook, 2017; Truong et al., 2020) . Such inference -based approaches can identify local changes 

but do not c onstruct an internal model of progression. Similar ly, supervised and pretrain вҖ“finetune pipelines depend on externally defined stage boundaries, limiting their ability to uncover 

individualized cognitive trajectories. 

A progression -aware perspective require s rethinking the problem formulation. Rather than asking 

which predefined state a signal belongs to, we ask: how does neural activity organize itself over 

time? Can we discover temporally coherent stages characterized by internally predictable 

dynamics, sh arp transitions between processing regimes, and re producible structure across 

repeated trials? Can such discovered structures reveal stable, person -specific neurodynamic 

manifolds that reflect how individuals habitually process information and commit to de cisions? 

To address these questions, we propose a self -supervised evolutionary learning (SSEL) framework 

for discovering individualized neurodynamic progression directly from continuous EEG. The 

framework jointly optimizes multiple criteria grounded in cog nitive plausibility: within -stage 

temporal predict ability (reflecting metastable state stability), boundary contrast (reflecting rapid 

transitions between processing regimes), cross -trial alignment (reflecting invariant stage 

sequences across repetitions), and sparsity (supporting interpretable stage -wise neural signatures). 

Crucially, because temporal boundaries are discrete and non -differentiable, we adopt a population -

based evolutionary search paradigm that directly explores the combinatorial space of ca ndidate 

segmentations without requiring differenti able relaxations. 

We evaluate the proposed framework on EEG recorded during a simulated road -crossing decision 

task. This paradigm provides a canonical example of safety -critical sequential decision making in 

which perceptual appraisal, risk evaluation, de liberation, and motor commitment unfold over time. 

By applying SSEL to this setting, we demonstrate that meaningful stage structures and 

interpretable channel вҖ“band signatures emerge endogenously from neural dynamics, without 

externally defined cognitive mo dels. Importantly, the proposed methodology is task -agnostic and 

assumes only that cognition exhibits temporally organized regimes , a property shared by many 

sequential processes including evidence accumula tion, working memory updating, metacognitive 

evalu ation, and multi -step reasoning. The road -crossing scenario therefore serves as an 

instantiation of a broader problem: uncovering the latent progression of cognitive neurodynamics 

from continuous brain acti vity. 

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews related work on EEG 

security, SSL , and temporal segmentation from a cognitive neurodynamic perspective. Section 3 

presents the proposed SSEL framework and experimental design. Sec tion 4 reports quantitative 

results, neurophysiolo gical plausibility analyses, and evolutionary search dynamics. Section 5 

discusses the cognitive mechanisms, theoretical implications, and broader generality of 

progression -aware neurodynamic modeling. 

2 Literature Review 

2.1 EEG Security and Privacy: From Biometric Protection to Neurodynamic Security Research at the intersection of EEG and cybersecurity can be broadly categorized into three lines 

of work , each addressing a different aspect of security but sharing a common assumption that EEG 

is either a static credential or a data object to be protected. 

The first line treats EEG as a biometric modality for authentication and identification (Baraku et 

al., 2024; Ster giadis et al., 2022) . EEG is considered as a hard -to -forge biometric token, analogous 

to fingerprints or facial images. Typical systems acquire EEG under either resting or stimulus -

evoked paradigms, such as eyes -open/eyes -closed resting state, motor image ry, P300 oddball tasks, 

or visually evoked potentials. From these recordings, spectral, time вҖ“frequency, or spatial вҖ“temporal 

features are extracted and used with traditional classifiers (e.g., LDA, SVM) or deep architectures 

(e.g., CNNs, RNNs) to perform us er identification or verification (Alahaideb et al., 2025; Chan et 

al., 2018; Khalil et al., 2024) . Although promising accuracy has been reported in small -scale, 

within -session studies , substantial degradation acro ss sessions, days, and contexts remains a 

persistent challenge (Rehman et al., 20 25) . P ractical limitations related to wearability , setup time, 

user comfort, and susceptibility to artifacts are also reported (Jala ly Bidgoly et al., 2020) . Recent 

research often positions EEG -based authentication as a secondary or multi -factor modality in high -

security contexts such as virtual reality systems , military applications, or critical infrastructure 

environments (Tucci et al., 2025; Vadher et al., 2024) . From a security perspective, however, th is 

line of work conceptualize s EEG primarily as a biometric credential , rather than address ing the 

security of EEG signals themselves .

A c los ely related line of re search focuses on secur ing EEG as sensitive data . Because EEG can 

reveal highly private attributes , such as neurological disorders, emotional states and cognitive 

capacity , researchers increasingly recognize that using EEG for authent ication or decoding 

introduces new privacy risks . This has motivated work on template protection, anonymization, and 

synthetic data EEG generation. One major direction is the design of revocable (cancellable) 

biometric templates , in which non -invertible tr ansform ations map EEG feature into protected 

space s that can be revoked and reissued even if leaked (Wa ng et al. , 2022b) . Another direction is 

using GANs to generate realistic synthetic EEG for data shar ing or training without disclosing real 

subject data (De bie et al., 2020; Zhou & Liao, 2022) . Some studies explicitly introduce differential 

privacy constraints into GANs to control identifiability (Habashi et al., 2023) . There are also 

broader privacy -preserving brain -computer inte rface (BCI ) frameworks that further examine 

cross -subject variability, privacy вҖ“utility trade -offs, and privacy evaluation metrics, emphasizing 

the need for unif ying privacy protection at the architectural and algorithmic levels (Xia et al., 2022) .

These researches recognize EEG as a new source of privacy leakage , but they treat EEG largely 

as static sensitive data to be protected , rather than as a temporally structured si gnal whose 

dynamics could themselves contribute to security. As a result, current methods struggle to 

internalize rich temporal structure or leverage neurodynamic patterns as endogenous security 

resources. 

A third l ine of work investigates adversarial atta cks and defenses for EEG -based BCIs. Recent 

studies demonstrate that EEG -based BCIs are highly vulnerable to adversarial perturbations , where imperceptible signal modifications can induce severe misclassification in motor imagery or BCI 

spelling tasks , exp osing EEG -BCI systems themselves as a new attack surface (Zhang et al., 20 20) .

Other works explores d ata poisoning , backdoor , and filtering attacks . Some work proposes narrow -

pulse data poisoning and adversarial filtering attacks, where manipulation of training data or online 

data can significantly degrade decoding performance or hijack outputs under specific trigger 

conditions (Meng et al., 2024; Meng et al., 2023) . In response. emerging security evaluatio n and 

defensive benchmarks , such as attention -based defenses, alignment -based defenses, and 

adversarial training combined with active learning, are. beginning to form an attack вҖ“defe nse 

ecosystem for EEG -BCI security (Aissa et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2025; Chen e t al., 2024; Wu et 

al., 2023) .This body o f research conveys a critical insight : EEG is not inherently secure , and when 

neural signals are directly coupled to control channels, robustness against adversarial attacks must 

be taken seriously. 

Across these three lines of work, research primarily focuses on using EEG as a more secure 

password, preventing EEG leakage, or improving robustness of EEG classifiers under attack. None 

explicitly model the neurodynamic progression of cognition or leverage individualized temporal 

traject ories as intrinsic identity or security markers. This gap motivates a shift from protecting 

EEG as data toward lear ning security -relevant structure from neurodynamics themselves. 

2.2 Self -Supervised Learning for EEG and Temporal Segmentation 

SSL has recent ly attracted increasing attention in EEG research as a means to reduce reliance on 

costly labeled data (Rafiei et al., 2022; Weng et al., 2025) . Most existing EEG вҖ“SSL approaches 

formulate pretext tasks to learn a вҖңhigh -qualityвҖқ latent representation from unlabeled EEG, which 

is subsequently fine -tuned or evaluated on downstream supervised tasks such as sleep staging, 

emotion recognition, or motor imagery classification (Weng et al., 2025) . The dominant paradigm 

follows a two -stage pipeline : self -supervised pretraining using objectives such as contrastive 

learning, reconstruction, or prediction, followed by downs tream classification or regression with 

limited labels. Under this paradigm, although SSL is used to learn latent features, segment ation is 

treated only as a possible downstream task (and is rarely explored). This orientation is also 

reflected in evaluatio n practices. Existing EEG вҖ“SSL methods are predominantly assessed using 

downstream task performance like decoding accuracy (Ou et al., 2022) . Consequently, SSL is used 

primarily to improve label efficiency and representation transferability, rather than to infer intrinsic 

temporal structure. Nevertheless , our work frames segmentation itself as the core inference 

problem: the objective is to discover temporally cohe rent cognitive stages or individual -specific 

neurodynamic trajectories directly from continuous EEG, with the intrinsic temporal structure 

serving as the supervision signal. 

Most EEG вҖ“SSL methods derive their self -supervised signals from artificially constr ucted 

transformations or contrast structures. Representative categories include contrastive learning (Hu 

et al., 2024) , e.g., SimCLR (Mohsenvand et al., 2020) , BENDR (Kostas et al., 202 1) , ContraWR 

(Yang et al., 2023) , CL -SSTER (Shen et al., 2024) , reconstruction or masking -based objectives ,e.g., MAEEG (Chien et al., 2022) , AFTA -Transformer (Huang et al. , 2025) , EEGPT (Wang et al., 

2024) , EEG -TPSR (Dai et al., 2025) , and preset transformation recognition tasks such as temporal 

reordering, channel shuffling, or frequency perturbation , as seen in GMSS (Li et al., 2022) . While 

effective for learning general -purpose embeddings, these approaches do not explicitly target real 

cognitive boundaries or event segmentation i n EEG, as the supervision signal originates fro m

synthetic perturbations rather than endogenous neural dynamics (Weng et al., 2025) .

Although SSL -based segmentation remains rare in EEG research, closely related problems have 

been extensively explored in other temporal modalities, particularly speech and video. In speech 

and audio processing, self -supervised me thods have been developed for phoneme boundary 

detection and unsupervised speech segmentation. For example, segment -level contrastive 

predictive coding (SCPC) learns hierarchical representations to identify ph oneme -like fragments 

and boundaries in continuo us speech without labels (Bhati et al., 2022) . Another work directly 

formulate s unsupervised phoneme boundary detection using contrastive objectives and peak 

detection (Kreuk et al., 2020) . Similar ideas appear in bioacoustic event segmentation, where self -

supervised learning is used to detect temporal boundaries in animal vocalizations (Bermant et al., 

20 22) .

In the video domain, self -supervised segmentation has been studied in both spatial and temporal 

contexts. For example, (Yang et al., 2021b) develops self -supervised video object segmen tation 

method by learning foreground -background separation from object motion cues on unlabeled 

video streams, and there are some similar s ubsequent works, e.g., self -supervised deformable 

attention distillation (Truong et al., 2024) , and self -supervised amodal visual object segmentation 

(Yao et al., 2022) . For temporal action segmentation, SSCAP first learns discri minative frame 

features through self -supervi sion, and then applies a Co -occurrence Action Parsing algorithm to 

parse sub -action temporal paths (Wang et al., 2022c) . SSTAE proposes a self -supervised temporal 

autoencoder that performs action segmentation in egocentric videos via reconstruction + clustering 

(Zhang et al., 2023) . More recent work further explores optimal transport / joint alignment + 

segmentation to achieve fully self -superv ised temporal action segmentation, such as V ASOT (Ali 

et al., 2025) . These methods share a common characteristic: self -supervised objectives (intra -

action consistency, cross -video co -occurrence, prediction/reconstruction objectives, etc ) are used 

to infer temporal structure and boundaries directly from raw sequential data .

Our work brings this segmentation -centric per spective to EEG for the first time. Inspired by 

advances in speech a nd video, we design self -supervised objectives tailored to EEG that explicitly 

target temporal boundary discovery under the assumption that intention formation and cognitive 

processing are stage -based. Importantly, unlike prior EEG вҖ“SSL approaches, our fram ework does 

not rely on artificial perturbations or downstream task supervision; instead, segmentation is treated 

as a structural inference problem driven by endogenous neurodynamic regular ities. 

2.3 Neurodynamic State Discovery and the Limits of Gradient -Based Segmentation From a cognitive neurodynamics standpoint, the problem of discovering latent stages from EEG 

is closely related to classical work on brain state segmentation, metastable dynamics, and state -

space models of cognition. Probabilistic framewo rks such as hidden Markov models (HMMs), 

switching linear dynamical systems, and related Bayesian change -point models have been widely 

used to infer latent brain states or transitions from neural time series (Borst & Anderson, 2015; 

Song et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2022a) . Related ideas also appear in EEG microstate analysis, where 

quasi -stable spatial patterns are identified and interpreted as elementary building blocks of 

cognition. 

While th ese approaches have prov ided valuable insights, they typically rely on parametric 

assumptions, gradient -based inference, or probabilistic state transitions defined over relatively 

low -dimensional representations. Moreover, they often emphasize population -level structure or 

short -timescale stability, rather than individualized, long -horizon neurodynamic progression. In 

practice, the discrete and sparse nature of temporal boundaries makes direct optimization difficult 

within standard differentiable frameworks .

Similarly , existing se lf -supervised segmentation methods in speech and video almost exclusively 

rely on gradient -based optimization, leveraging fully differentiable architectures (CNN / RNN / 

Transformer / 3D Conv) and losses (contrastive, reconstruction , prediction, co -occurre nce, etc.) .

Segmentation (boundaries/masks) is obtain ed either by attaching a differentiable head on the 

network output (e.g., frame -wise logits followed by argmax/CRF), or by simple post -processing 

such as thresholding or peak picking, with the core param eters still learned by gradients. However, 

EEG segmentation poses a fundamentally different challenge: the core variable of interest , whether 

a given time point constitutes a boundary , is discrete, sparse, and non -differentiable . This mismatch 

motivates th e exploration of alternative optimization paradigms. In this work , we adopt an 

evolutionary search framework that enables direct optimization over candidate segmentations and 

stage structures. By operating in the discrete space of temporal boundaries, the proposed approach 

complements probabilistic and gradient -based methods, providing a robust and interpretable 

mechanism for discovering individualized neurodynamic trajectories. 

3 Methodology 

3.1 Experimental Design 

Crossing the street is one of the most t ypical and safety -critical scenarios in human вҖ“vehicle 

interaction (Brill et al., 2024; Fu et al., 2019; Zhou et al., 2025b) . When pedestrians cross the road, 

they are essentially negotiating with traffic/vehicles: Is it safe for me to go now? Misjudgment in 

this negotiation , whether the pedestrian assumes safety when the vehicle cannot stop in time, or 

the opposite , can directly lead to traffic accidents for both conventional vehicles and intelligent 

connected vehic les (Gerogiannis & Bode, 2024) . Therefore, the scenario is highly safety critical .In addition, crossing decisions unfold over time as a cognitive process rather than an instantaneous 

label (Tian et al., 2024) . After perceiving the oncoming flow of vehicles, th e brain progresses 

through several stages: initial perception (seeing the car, estimating distance and speed), risk 

assessment (will I be hit if I go now?), strategy evaluation (should I wait for this car? the next one? 

should I walk faster or slower?), an d finally, an internal commitment to the decision of crossing or 

not crossing (Sun et al., 2015; Wang et al. , 2025; Zhang et al., 2025b) . This process forms a staged 

neurodynamic trajectory, meaning that crossing d ecisions are naturally a time -series problem with 

inherent cognitive boundaries. 

From a safety and security perspective, if autonomous or intelligent vehicles can understand a 

pedestrianвҖҷs internal decision boundaries , e.g., when they have fully committed to crossing versus 

when they are merely hesitating or probing , they can: (1) better predict pedestrian behavior and 

reduce collision risk (Zhou et al., 2024) , and (2) enable more fine -grained interaction strategies for 

V2P/e -HMI systems (De Clercq et al., 2019; Yue et al., 2025) . The refore, in this experimental task, 

we aim to learn each individualвҖҷs neur odynamic signatures during safety/danger evaluation and 

decision commitment, and examine whether these signatures remain stable and distinguishable 

across different scenarios, thereby providing a foundation for future human вҖ“vehicle interaction 

and operator authentication. 

In addition, our experiment includes multiple traffic scenarios (e.g., single versus multiple vehicles, 

different directions such as one -way or two -way flow). These m anipulations systematically alter 

both risk level and decision difficulty , thereby inducing different cognitive loads and risk 

assessment patterns in EEG. Based on this, we can test the robustness and generalization of the 

neurodynamic signatures. If our m ethod is truly learning вҖңan individualвҖҷs neurodynamic pattern 

during risk evaluation and decision commitmentвҖқ , then it should: (1) consistently detect similar 

intention -stage structures across different scenarios; (2) produce boundary patterns and signatures 

that remain relatively stable for the same person across multiple scen arios; and (3) yield signatures 

with distinguishable differences across individuals (supporting identity). Therefore, these 

signatures can serve as real priors for subsequent cybersecure human вҖ“vehicle systems. 

Specifically, five traffic scenarios were intr oduced in the experiment, as summariz ed in Table 1 

and illustrated in Figure 1 . GIF versions of the stimuli are provided in the supplementary materials. 

The scenarios were designed in Adobe Animate. The animations were created using Motion Tween 

(Adobe, 2023) at a frame rate of 24 FPS to produce realistic vehicular motion. Visual cues such as 

traffic lights, turn signals, and ambient lighting were rendered with keyframe -based fli cker effects 

and glow filters to approximate real -world luminance conditions. Scenarios were presented using 

PsychoPy v2022.2.5 (Peirce et al., 2019) . PsychoPy can simultaneously synchronize EEG signal s

recording, providing temporal markers for scene onset and reco rding time stamps for button 

response s associated with decision making commitment .

In the experiment, e ach trial began with a 500 ms fixation cross (вҖң+вҖқ), displayed at the center of 

the screen to stabilize visual attention and minimize eye -movement artifac ts. Then the animated 

video clip depi cting a road -crossing scene was played. Participants were instructed to imagine themselves as the pedestrian standing at the curb, observing traffic, and to press the вҖңupвҖқ key when 

they judged it was safe to cross. Each animation looped continuously until a response was made, 

ensuring self -paced decision -making without temporal constraints. Upon response, the next 

scenario was automatically initiated. 

Table 1. Descriptions of the simulated experimental scenarios. 

Traffic Scenarios Description 

Minimal Traffic 

Volume 

A two -lane road without signalized crosswalks, with no cars approaching 

within sight. 

Low Traffic Volume A two -lane road without signalized crosswalks, with two cars 

approaching at a slow speed within sight. 

High Traffic 

Volume 

A two -lane road without signalized crosswalks, with two cars 

approaching in the adjacent lane and three vehicles approaching in the 

opposite lane at a moderate speed within sight. 

Surface -marked 

Intersection 

A four -way intersection w ith surface -mar ked crosswalks but without 

traffic lights. One car is waiting behind the sidewalk on the side opposite 

to the pedestrianвҖҷs intended movement, with its right -turn signal flashing 

and visible within sight. 

Signalized 

Intersection 

A four -way i ntersection with surface -marked crosswalks and a traffic 

light (green/red). One car is waiting behind the sidewalk in the vertical 

orthogonal direction relative to the pedestrianвҖҷs intended movement with 

its right -turn signal flashing. A red tr affic light, perpendicular to the 

pedestrianвҖҷs movement, is visible at the intersection. 

Figure 1. Experimental Stimul us of scenario вҖңHigh Traffic Volume вҖқ (presented as animations to 

participants). 

3.2 Data recording 

EEG signals was recorded using a 14 -channel EPOC X headset, with electrodes pos itioned 

according to the international 10 вҖ“20 system (Klem et al., 1999) . Saline -soaked felt pads were used to ensure contact, and electrode impedance was continuously monitored through EmotivPro 

software (EMOTIV, 202 3) until all sensors achieved optimal contact quality. EEG data were 

sampled at 128 Hz with an online 0.16 Hz first -order high -pass filter applied to remove DC offset. 

Twelve subjects (six males and six females, mean age = 24.92 years) participated in the experiment. 

Informed consent was obtained verbally prior to part icipation, and the study protocol was approved 

by the University of Michigan Institutional Review Board (Reference ID: HUM00249262). 

EEG signal quality was assessed after importing the data into MNE -Python (Gramfort et al., 2013) ,

which automa tically evaluate s data completeness and channel integrity; all channels across all 

participants were therefore retained for analysis . Using the collected EEG data, we applied 

machine learni ng methods to predict pedestriansвҖҷ road -crossing intentions from ne ural signals, and 

achiev ed an AUC of 0.73 (Zhou et al., 2024) . This performa nce exceeds the best AUC reported by 

recent vision -based approaches that predict pedestrian crossing behavior using pose and positional 

information (AUC = 0.59 ) (Zou et al., 2025) , providing emp irical support for the reliability and 

informational richness of the EEG recordings. 

3. 3 Prepr ocessing and Representation 

The EEG recordings were preprocessed into bandpower features by Fast Fourier Transform 

(Cochran et al., 1967) , yielding 70 dimensions (14 electrodes Г— 5 frequency bands). Each trial рқ‘— is 

represented as a matrix рқ‘Ӣ $ вҲҲ в„қ'(Г—), where рқҗ· = 70 and рқ‘Ү $ is the trial length. Each row of рқ‘Ӣ $ is a 

feature vector at time рқ‘Ў :

рқ‘Ҙ 1 вҲҲ в„қ), рқ‘Ў = 1, вҖҰ , рқ‘Ү $

To remove scale differences across electrodes and bands, each feature dimension is standardized 

within a trial: 

рқ‘Ҙ 1,6 вҶҗ рқ‘Ҙ 1,6 вҲ’ рқңҮ $,6

рқңҺ $,6 + рқң– , рқ‘‘ = 1, вҖҰ , рқҗ· 

Where рқңҮ $,6 and рқңҺ $,6 are the mean and standard deviation of feature рқ‘‘ in trial рқ‘— , and рқң– = 10 >?

prevents division by zero. 

Ea ch candidate рқ‘җ consists of three ordered change -points as stage boundaries per trial: 

рқңҸ $ = Bрқ‘Ў C

> $

, рқ‘Ў D

> $

, рқ‘Ў E

> $

F, 0 < рқ‘Ў C 

> $

< рқ‘Ў D 

> $

< рқ‘Ў E 

> $

< рқ‘Ү $

which partition the trial into four contiguous stages, and stage -specific weights: 

рқ‘Ө I вҲҲ в„қ), вҖ–рқ‘Ө IвҖ–K вүӨ рқҗҫ N (sparse) 

where рқҗҫ N is the maximum umber of nonzero entries allowed per stage. To pro mote interpretability 

and physiological plausibility, we set рқҗҫ N to 5 -7, corresponding to the most informative electrode -

band combinations. within each stage рқ‘ҳ , the EEG is projected into a one -dimensional latent trajectory by :

рқ‘§ I(рқ‘Ў ) = рқ‘Ө IвҠӨрқ‘Ҙ 1

which makes subsequent dynamics and distribution shifts tractable. 

3. 4 Objective Function 

We design a multi -term objective (including temporal predictability, inter -stage distinctness, cross -

trial consistency, and parsimony) to evaluate the quality o f a candidate segmentation . Each term is 

chosen to reflect a basic cognitive -neurodynamic principle: cognitive states tend to be locally 

stable, transitions reflect qualitative shifts in pro cessing, and the stage sequence of a repeated task 

should be repro ducible across trials. 

1. Predictability within stages (stage stability) . For each projected trajectory рқ‘§ I , we fit a n

autoregressive model of order 1 (AR(1)) :

рқ‘§ 1 вүҲ рқ‘Һ рқ‘§ 1>C + рқ‘Ҹ + рқң– 1

and c ompute the mean squared residual error. This terms rewards segmentations that produce 

stages with internally predictable dynamics, aligning with the neurodynamic intuition that a

meta stable cognitive state should exhibit relatively structured temporal evol ution, whereas 

prediction error should increase near transitions where the underlying processing regime changes .

This formulation also aligns with classical time -series segmentation assumptions, where each 

segment is modeled as an approximately stationary process and fitted using autoregressive or state -

space models, as seen in HMM s and HSMMs. In cognitive neurodynamics , the same idea appears 

in вҖңbrain statesвҖқ con cepts, where within state spectral or connectivity patterns are expected to 

remain relatively s table over short intervals .

2. Boundary contrast (regime shift between processing stages) . To ensure adjacent stages 

correspond to genuinely different cognitive sta tes rather than smooth fluctuations , we compute 

the symmetric Kullback вҖ“Leibler (KL) divergence between Gaussian fits of neighboring stage 

distributions. Let рқңҮ C, рқңҺ C 

> D

and рқңҮ D, рқңҺ D 

> D

denote the means and variances of two consecutive stages, 

the symmetric divergence is: 

рқҗ· NWXYZ = 1

2 ( рқңҺ C

> D

рқңҺ D 

> D

+ рқңҺ D

> D

рқңҺ C 

> D

+ (рқңҮ C вҲ’ рқңҮ D)D \ 1

рқңҺ C 

> D

+ 1

рқңҺ D

> D

] вҲ’ 2)

This term is maxim ized because if a time point is designated as a boundary , the neural activity 

patterns on either side of that boundary should exhibit a pronounced change, reflecting a rapid 

transition between qualitatively different processing stages (e.g., from per ceptua l assessment to 

risk evaluation or decision commitment), rather than minor drift .

3. Cross -trial alignment (reproducible stage sequence) . Because trials are repetitions of the same 

task, transitions should occur at consistent relative positions across trials. We therefore penalize 

the squared deviation between each trialвҖҷs normalized boundary positions рқӣј $ = рқңҸ $/рқ‘Ү $ and the across -trial m ean рқӣј `. This encourages the model to discover reproducible stage structures rather 

than overfitting to idiosyncr atic noise in individual trials. Although response durations may 

vary across trials, the internal cognitive process underlying a вҖңsafe -to -crossвҖқ decision generally 

follows a n invariant sequence of stages вҖ”perception, risk assessment, deliberation, and 

decis ion commitment. Accordingly, the boundaries we aim to identify correspond to recurring 

neurodynamic transitions that can be temporally aligned across repetitions . This perspective is 

consistent with self -supervised segmentation in video and speech, where c ross -sample co -

occurrence and alignment are leveraged to identify recurring action segments or phoneme -like 

units. 

4. Sparsity (interpretable stage -wise signatures) . To improve interpretability and isolate compact 

neurodynamic signatures , we include an L1 pen alty рқңҶ CвҖ–рқ‘Ө I вҖ–C that drives most feature weights 

to zero, leaving only the few most informative electrode -band pairs for each stage. This 

support s stage -wise attribution by encouraging each discovered cognitive state to be 

characterized by a sparse set of salient neurophysiological features, rather than diffuse patterns 

that are difficult to interpret and less robust to noise. 

The final objective f or a candidate рқ‘җ is: 

в„’(рқ‘җ ) = c(рқҗҝ ef CBрқ‘§ $I F) вҲ’ рқңҶ g6hW c(рқҗ· NWXYZ Bрқ‘§ $I , рқ‘§ $,IiCF + рқңҶ jklmn coрқӣј $ вҲ’ рқӣј `oD + рқңҶ C cвҖ–рқ‘Ө IвҖ–C

> I$$,I$,I

In our implementation, we set рқңҶ g6hW = 0.3, рқңҶ jklmn = 0.1, and рқңҶ C = 0.05 , values tuned to balance 

discriminability and stability. These values were chosen empi rically after preliminary runs: higher 

boundary weights caused over -segmentation, while stronger sparsity could overly degrade 

predictability. 

3. 5 Evolutionary Optimizat ion 

In current research works that integrate evolutional computation (EC) with SSL, the re are two 

dominant paradigms (Vinhas et al., 2025) . The first uses EC to support SSL by optimizing pseudo -

labels , data transformations, architectures, or learning rules in pretext tasks and downstrea m fine -

tuning , while the second uses SSL to support EC by providing learned representations, smarter 

variation operators, or surrogate fitness functions. Our work belong s nominally to the former 

category (EC for SSL ), but departs fundamentally in what is b eing optimized and why. 

Most existing EC -for -SSL approaches treat evolution as a mechanism for configuration 

optimization , which can be broadly categorized as follows. 

Pretext task вҖ“ Dataset (evolving вҖңdataвҖқ or pseudo -labels) . This line of work uses EC to adjust the 

data or pseudo -labels used in self -supervised tasks . For example, GenNAS uses evolutionary 

algorithms to search for synthetic signals or pseudo -labe l combinations that yield better feature 

representations during the pretext stage (Li et al., 2021) . Another strategy evol ves input 

transformations or augmentation functions , such as cropping, noise injection, masking, or combinations thereof, in order to automatically identify effective augmentation for contrastive or 

reconstruction tasks. These methods are most commonly app lied to image representation learning. 

Pretext task вҖ“ Topology (evolving network architecture) . The second category uses EC to e volv e

encoder or autoencoder architecture, including convolutional layer depth, channel width, skip 

connections, or whether to include a projector head , etc. Most studies focus on autoencoder / 

reconstruction -based SSL, such as EvoAE (Lander & Shang, 2015) , EvoVAE (Chen et al., 2020 ),

and EUDNN (Sun et al., 2018) . These approaches are primarily used for self -supervised 

pretraining of image or text features, followed by classification or retrieval as downstream tasks .

Pretext task вҖ“ Learning (evolving learning rules and hyperparameters) . A third group evolves how 

the model learns , including l earni ng rates, optimizer configurations , loss weights , or training 

schedules. In some cases, the self -supervised objective is also included in the search space. 

However, most of these still lean toward reconstruction loss and architecture search, and very few 

addresses inherently non -differentiable objectives such as sparse temporal boundary selection. 

Downstream stage (evolutionary fine -tun ing and model selection) . A small portion of work applies 

EC during the downstream fine -tuning stage to select the best enc oder , task -specific head or 

hyperparameters based on limited labeled data. The performance is typically assessed using 

downstream metrics such as accuracy, most commonly in speech recognition, text classification, 

or image classification tasks. 

Despite the ir diversity, evolut ion is used to optimize the configuration in SSL, rather than the self -

supervised inference target itself. Evolution operates on how data are transformed, how models 

are structured, or how learning proceeds, while the core learning prob lem , typically conti nuous, 

differentiable representation learning , is still solved by gradient -based optimization. Our approach, 

however, uses EC to directly optimize the structural outcome of self -supervised learning, namely 

sparse temporal boundary selec tion and segmentation. Rather than evolving architectures, 

hyperparameters, or pretext -task definitions, we evolve the segmentation solution itse lf .

Specifically, w e design an evolutionary algorithm to search the space of possible temporal 

segmentations th at jointly refines temporal boundaries and stage -specific feature weights. The 

procedure is as follows: 

1. Initialization. 

Each candidate рқ‘җ is initialized with sparse weights рқ‘Ө I вҲҲ в„қ) and change points рқңҸ $ =

Bрқ‘Ў C

> $

, рқ‘Ў D

> $

, рқ‘Ў E

> $

F positione d near quartiles wit h added random jitter. 

2. Population loop 

For each generation рқ‘” = 1, вҖҰ рқҗә with population size рқ‘ғ = 60 :

1) Evaluation: compute the objective в„’(рқ‘җ ) for each candidate. 

2) Selection: retain the top рқҗё = 6 elites unchanged. The remaining рқ‘ғ вҲ’ рқҗё offspring a re 

generated by rank -proportional selection. 3) Crossover: given two parents рқ‘җ (C), рқ‘җ (D), offspring boundaries are set to the elementwise 

median: 

рқңҸ xylk6 = рқ‘ҡрқ‘’рқ‘‘рқ‘–рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ (рқңҸ (C), рқңҸ (D))

and weights are averaged, 

рқ‘Ө I,xylk6 = 1

2 (рқ‘Ө I 

> (C)

+ рқ‘Ө I

> (D)

)

4) Mutation: with probability рқ‘қ  = 0.1, each boundary is jittered by up to Вұ0.05 рқ‘Ү $. With 

probability рқ‘қ ВҒ = 0.1, each weight entry is perturbed by Gussian noise, 

рқ‘Ө I,6 вҶҗ рқ‘Ө I,6 + рқң– , рқң– ~рқ’© (0, 0.1D)

Or a nonzero feature ind ex is swapped with a zero feature to maintain sparsity. 

3. Early stopping 

If the best objective value does not improve for 15 generations, evolution stops. In practice, 

convergence is typically achieved within 50 generations, yielding stable segmentations and 

interpretable feature masks. 

3. 6 Bas eline Methods 

3. 6.1 Baseline Selection Rationale 

To benchmark our self -supervised evolutionary learning , we implemented three strong 

unsupervised segmentation baselines. All methods enforce a minimum segment length of 8 % of 

the trial. 

In the statistical change -point detection category, segmentation is treated as the task of вҖңfinding 

time points where the statistical properties of a time series changeвҖқ . In general time -series research, 

comprehensive surveys (Aminikhanghahi & Cook, 2017; Truong et al., 2020) classify these 

methods into probabilistic models, cost -function + dynamic programming approaches, and kernel -

based approaches. Representative methods include: 

Bayesian Online Ch ange -Point Dete ction (BOCPD) . Proposed by (Adams & MacKay, 2 007) 

for online Bayesian change -point detection, explicitly modeling the posterior distribution of the 

вҖңrun lengthвҖқ and updating the probability of a new segment at every new sample. Widely used for 

online state change detection in medical and physiolog ical time series (e.g., heart rate, respiration, 

and other biosignals) (Gee et al., 2018) .

Kernel Methods (Kernel Change -Point Detection, KCPD) . Use kernel techniques to map high -

dimensional observations into a fe ature space where distribution shifts can be detected using 

criteria such as Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD ) (Gretton et al., 2012) . (Arlot et al., 2019) 

provided foundational theory and algorithms; both TruongвҖҷs survey and t he ruptures library treat kernel CPD as a major category (Truong et al., 2018, 2020) . Suitable for high -dimensional, 

nonlinear time series, aligning well with high -dimensional EEG settings. 

PELT (Pruned Exact Linear Time) and Other Penalized Cost + DP Meth ods . PELT is a typical 

вҖңcost function + penalty + dynamic programmingвҖқ framework (Killick et al., 2012) . TruongвҖҷs 

survey treat s it as a strong baseline for offline multiple change -point detection, with near -linear 

computational complexity (Truong et al., 2020) .

These methods were origina lly mainstream tools for gene ral time -series segmentation and are 

often adapted for EEG (especially for sleep stage transitions, brain state switching, noise segment 

detection, etc.) (Sinn et al., 2012a) , but they are fundame ntally modality -agnostic. We therefore 

select these three classic, broadly reproducible, and widely recognized methods as our baselines 

for comparison. 

In addition, there are another two categories of methods for segmentation on time -series data. One 

is model -driven state -switching methods , such as Hidden Markov Models (HMM )/ Hidden Semi -

Markov Models (HSMM ), and switching state -space models (Borst & Anderson, 2015; Song et 

al., 2019; Wa ng et al., 2022a) . The model -driven approach explicitly model s latent states and their 

transition probabilities, making it well suited for interpreting sequences of putative вҖңbrain statesвҖқ 

(Williams et al., 2018) . However, they typically require pre -specif ication of the number of states 

(Sgouralis & PressГ©, 2017) , and rely on EM/Baum вҖ“Welch вҖ“based training procedures , which 

become computationally heavy for high -dimensional EEG signals and long temporal sequences 

(Siddiqi & Moore, 2005) . The other is hybrid deep lea rning + encoding вҖ“segmentation methods ,

such as autoencoder + HMM, VAE + clustering, etc., commonly used in epilepsy or sleep studies 

(Rivas -Carrillo et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2021a; YДұldДұz et al., 2022) . Although these approaches 

incorporate representation learning, they are generally designed to support specific downstream 

tas ks such as event or episode detection, with performance ev aluated primarily using task -level 

accuracy or classification metrics rather than boundary detection quality itself (YДұldДұz et al., 2022; 

Zhao et al., 2024b) .

Because our w ork treats temporal boundary discovery as the primary inference objective , rather 

than as an intermediate step toward downstream classification , and avoids assumptions about the 

number of latent states or task -specific labels, the problem setting is fundam entally different from 

those addressed by these methods. Therefore , they are not included as baseline comparisons in our 

evaluation. 

3. 6.2 Baseline implementation 

(1) PELT with L2 cost 

Pruned Exact Linear Time (PELT) algorithm is a dynamic programming approach for change -point 

detection (Killick et al., 2012) . It is a computationally efficient ( рқ‘Ӯ (рқ‘Ү ) ) and well -suited for 

multivariate Gaussian -like signals (Maidstone et al., 2017) .For each trial рқ‘Ӣ вҲҲ в„қ'Г—), PELT minimizes the penalized residual sum of squares: 

min 

> ВҲ,Вү,ВҠ

c c вҖ–рқ‘Ҙ 1 вҲ’ рқ‘Ҙ М…IвҖ–D 

> D

+ рқӣҪ вӢ… рқ‘ҡ 

> ВҺiC
> 1ВҸВҺiC
> E
> IВҸK

where рқ‘Ҙ М…I is the segment mean, рқ‘ҡ the number of change -points, and рқӣҪ a pe nalty controlling over -

segmentation. 

For the output, three boundaries closets to quartiles, repaired to meet minimum length, are retained. 

(2) Kernel Change -Point Detection (RBF kernel) 

We use the KernalCPD method with an RBF kernel to capture non -linear distrib utional changes 

across EEG features (Harchaoui et al., 2008; Sinn et al., 2012b) .

For trial рқ‘Ӣ , kernelCPD minimizes within -segment kernel variance: 

min 

> ВҲ,Вү,ВҠ

c c рқҗҫ (рқ‘Ҙ 1, рқ‘Ҙ 1) вҲ’ 1

рқ‘ӣ I

c рқҗҫ (рқ‘Ҙ N, рқ‘Ҙ 1)

> N,1вҲҲВҗВҺ
> ВҺiC
> 1ВҸВҺiC
> E
> IВҸK

where рқҗҫ (рқ‘Ҙ N, рқ‘Ҙ 1) = exp (вҲ’вҖ–рқ‘Ҙ N вҲ’ рқ‘Ҙ 1вҖ–D/2рқңҺ D) and рқ‘ӣ I is the segment size. 

Boundaries are chosen to maximi ze kernel contrast, then enforced to quartilelike positions if 

underdetermined. 

(3) Bayesian Online Change -Point Detection (BOCPD) with PCA(1) 

BOCPD provides an online Bayesian approach with well -ca librated uncertainty to infer the timing 

of cognitive state transitions (Adams & MacKay, 2007; Koerner et al., 2017) . The algori thmic 

details are described as follows. For projection: 

рқ‘§ 1 = рқ‘ў CвҠӨ(рқ‘Ҙ 1 вҲ’ рқ‘Ҙ М… ), рқ‘ў C = рқ‘Һрқ‘ҹрқ‘” max 

> В—:вҖ–В—вҖ–ВҸC

вҖ–рқ‘Ӣ В—вҖ–D

Run -length рқ‘ҹ 1 follows a constant hazard рқҗ» = 1/рқңҶ with рқңҶ = 200 . Predictive distribution for new 

points is Student -t: 

рқ‘қ (рқ‘§ 1 |рқ‘§ C:1>C, рқ‘ҹ 1>C) = рқ‘Ў Вӣ(рқңҮ , рқңҺ D)

with parameters updated recursively from sufficient statistics. 

Change -points are identified at local minima in run -length with high negative log predictive scores. 

The top three are selected subject to minimum length. 

3. 7 Evaluation Metrics 

Because EEG seg mentation is unsupervised, we canno t rely on ground -truth labels to assess 

accuracy. Instead, we design a suite of intrinsic and stability -based metrics that capture how well a segmentation explains the signal, how distinct adjacent stages are, and how rep roducible results 

are across top ca ndidates. 

3. 7.1 Intrinsic Predictability Gain 

As computed in Section 3.2 , we further computed the mean squared error (MSE) of the AR(1) fit 

within each stage, рқҗҝ N1jmВң , and compare it against the MSE of a global AR(1) model fit to the entire 

trial, рқҗҝ mkВқgjk . The AR predictability gain is defined as: 

рқҗҙрқ‘… вҲ’ рқҗәрқ‘Һрқ‘–рқ‘ӣ = max (0, рқҗҝ mkВқgjk вҲ’ рқҗҝ N1jmВң 

````````

рқҗҝ mkВқgjk + рқң– )

Stable cognitive states should be internally predictable. Segmentations that isolate such states thus 

achieve lo wer AR(1) error compared to modeling the whole trial as one process. 

3. 7.2 Out -of -Segment Generalization 

We test whether stage -specific AR models generalize beyond their training portion. For each stage 

segment of length рқ‘ӣ , we fit an AR(1) model on the fi rst half and evaluate on the second half, 

yielding a test error рқҗҝ 1ВңN1 . If segmentation captures meaningful states, then models trained on one 

part of a stage should predict the rest, thus demonstrating temporal coherence rather t han 

overfitting. 

Th e generalization gain is defined as: 

рқҗәрқ‘’рқ‘ӣ вҲ’ рқҗәрқ‘Һрқ‘–рқ‘ӣ = max (0, рқҗҝ mkВқgjk вҲ’ рқҗҝ 1ВңN1 

``````

рқҗҝ mkВқgjk + рқң– )

3. 7.3 Boundary Contrast (Separation) 

To measure distinctness between adjacent stages, we compare their distributions using a symmetri c

KL divergence (see Section 3.2 ). The average across three boundaries gives the boundary contrast 

score. 

3. 7.4 Stability Across Top -K Candidates 

Because SSEL saves the best рқҗҫ = 5 candidates, we assess stability in two ways: 

Boundary stability : For each trial and boundary, we compute the normalized mean absolute 

deviation (MAD) of change -points across candidates: 

рқ‘Ҷрқ‘Ўрқ‘Һрқ‘Ҹрқ‘–рқ‘ҷрқ‘–рқ‘Ўрқ‘Ұ = рқ‘Җрқҗҙрқҗ· ({рқңҸ (C), вҖҰ , рқңҸ (Y)})

рқ‘Ү 

Lower values indicate consistent boundary placement. Channel -set stability : For each stage, we take th e top -8 features (by absolute weight) from each 

candidate and compute the pairwise Jaccard index: 

рқҗҪ (рқҗҙ , рқҗө ) = |рқҗҙ вҲ© рқҗө |

|рқҗҙ вҲӘ рқҗө |

The average across all candidate pairs quantifies how consistently the algorithm selects the same 

features. Since robust me thods should yie ld similar segmentations and channel selections across 

near -optimal runs , higher values are better. 

4 Results 

This section aims to highlight the dual interpretability of our approach: on one hand, the identified 

stages and associated featu re maps reveal neurophysiologically plausible channel вҖ“band signatures 

across cognitive stages, demonstrating the methodвҖҷs ability to capture meaningful brain dynamics; 

on the other hand, the evolutionary trajectories provide algorithmic transparency, showi ng how 

candidate solutions progressively refine through exploration and exploitation within a structured 

fitness landscape. 

4.1 Segmentation Performance Against Baselines 

Figure 1. Intrinsic Predictability Gain (AR вҖ“Gain) across methods. Figure 2. Out -of-Segment Generalization Gain (Gen вҖ“Gain) across methods. 

Figure 3. Boundary Contrast across methods. To assess whether segmentation methods differed significantly across the three evaluation metrics, 

we employed non -parametric, within -subject analyses. T he Friedman test was used to evaluate 

overall differences, complemented by KendallвҖҷs W to estimate effect size (interpreted as weak: 

0.1 вҖ“0.3, moderate: 0.3 вҖ“0.5, strong: >0.5). Post -hoc comparis ons were conducted using Wilcoxon 

signed -rank tests with Holm вҖ“Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons. For each pairwise 

comparison, we additionally report the standardized effect size рқ‘ҹ = |рқ‘§ |вҲҡрқ‘ӣ .

4.1.1 Intrinsic Predictability Gain (AR вҖ“Gain) 

The Fried man test indicated a significant effect of method on AR вҖ“Gain, ПҮ2(3)=15.40, p=0.0015, 

with a moderate effect size (KendallвҖҷs W=0. 43, n=12). Post -hoc comparisons revealed that pelt_l2 

achie ved significantly higher AR вҖ“Gain than both SSEL (z=вҲ’2.98, pHolm =0.0059, r=0.86) and 

kernel_rbf (z=вҲ’2.98, pHolm=0.0059, r=0.86). A trend favoring pelt_l2 over bocpd_pca1 

(pHolm=0.084) was also observed, but did not survive correction. Other pairwise contras ts were 

not significant . These results suggest that pelt_l2 pro vides the strongest within -stage predictability, 

while SSEL perform s comparatively w eaker on this metric. 

From a neurodynamic perspective, this outcome suggests that pelt_l2 favors segmentation s that 

impose stronger local stationarity, effectively prioriti zing internally homogeneous states. By 

contrast, SSEL permits greater within -stage variability, which may reflect the fact that real 

cognitive stages , particularly deliberative or evaluative ph ases , are not strictly stationary but 

exhibit structured fluctu ations as evidence accumulates and uncertainty is resolved. Thus, slightly 

reduced AR вҖ“Gain does not necessarily indicate inferior cognitive modeling, but rather a relaxation 

of overly rigid sta bility assumptions in favor of richer neurodynamic trajectories .

4.1.2 Out -of -Segment Generalization Gain (Gen вҖ“Gain) 

For Gen вҖ“Gain, the Friedman test revealed a highly significant method effect, ПҮ2(3)=27.26, 

p<5.2Г—10вҲ’6, with a strong effect size (KendallвҖҷs W=0. 76, n=12). Post -hoc analyses indicated that 

SSEL performed significantly better than each of the three baselines. SSELвҖҷs Gen вҖ“Gain was 

significantly higher than kernel_rbf (z=вҲ’3.06, pHolm=0.0029, r=0. 88 ), pelt_l2 (z=вҲ’3.06, 

pHolm=0.0029, r=0.88), and bocpd_pca1 (z=вҲ’2.98, pHolm=0.0039, r=0.86), with very large effect 

sizes. No significant differences emerged among the t hree baseline methods. These findings 

demonstrate that SSEL generalized substantially better to capture temporal coherence across stage 

halves .

Thi s strong generalization indicates that SSEL identifies stable cognitive stages whose internal 

dynamics are co nsistent across time, even when evaluated on held -out portions of the same stage. 

This suggests that the discovered segments correspond to genuine cognitive regimes , such as 

sustained evidence evaluation or motor readiness , rather than transient patterns t ied to local noise 

or momentary fluctuations. Importantly, it implies that these stages reflect enduring internal 

processing modes, not arbitrary t emporal partitions. 

4.1.3 Boundary Contrast (symmetric KL divergence) A significant effect of method was also observed for Boundary Contrast, ПҮ2(3)=24.40, 

p=2.06Г—10вҲ’5, with a strong effect size (KendallвҖҷs W=0.68 , n=12). Post -hoc tests showed that 

SSEL exhibited significantly higher boundary separation than all three baselines : pelt_l2, 

kernel_rbf, and bocpd_pca1 all yielded z=вҲ’3.06, pHolm=0.0029, r=0.88 . Pairwise comparisons 

among the baseline methods did not reach statistical significance following correction. These 

results indicate that SSEL is substantially more effective at delineating distinct state boundarie s

compared to the other methods. 

Higher boundary contrast implies that transitions identified by SSEL co rrespond to abrupt shifts 

between qualitatively different processing stages , rather than gradual drift. This is consistent with 

models of decision makin g in which commitment emerges through relatively sharp transitions ,

such as the shift from deliberation to action , despite variability in overall response time. The results 

therefore support the interpretation of SSEL boundaries as meaningful cognitive sta te transitions. 

4.1.4 Trial Segmentation Visualization 

To illustrate how the different segmentation meth ods operate on raw EEG -derived features, we 

present segmentation results from a representative subject across five trials (see Figures 4&5).

Segmentatio n was applied to the projected trial trajectories (z -values along samples), with vertical 

dashed lines indicating the detected change -points. 

Among the four methods, bocpd_pca1 yielded stage demarcations that were overly consistent, with 

little variability across runs. While such stability may appear desirable, it is implausible in the 

context of our trial design, where diversity in scenario complexity should naturally introduce 

variability in boundary placement. By contrast, our SSEL method more faithfully followed natural 

oscillatory transitions and demonstrated stronger alignment with both behaviora l observations and 

retrospective analyses. For example, in Trial 1, the scenario was very simple: once the subject 

perceived the environment, they quickly tran sitioned to action initiation, resulting in very short 

intermediate stages (Stages 2 and 3). A si milar pattern was seen in Trial 2, though the introduction 

of additional elements in the scene prolonged the perceptual stage. In Trial 3, with multiple traffi c

flows creating a difficult crossing decision, SSEL revealed a clear stage corresponding to evid ence 

accumulation before decision commitment; even after perceptual clarity was achieved, the subject 

withheld action until the right opportunity, reflected in a sustained Stage 3 of motor readiness. 

These examples illustrate that SSEL adapts boundary plac ement to task difficulty and internal 

deliberation demands, revealing extended intermediate stages when decisions require prolonged 

evidence accumulation, and compressed stages when the perceptual вҖ“action mapping is 

straightforward. This flexibility is cons istent with cognitive models in which stage order is 

preserved but stage duration varies with uncertainty and environmental complexity. 

For kernel_rbf and pelt _l2, both introduced greater variability in boundary placement compared to 

bocpd_pca1. Notably, p elt_l2 produced finer -grained segmentations, likely benefiting from its 

globally optimal dynamic programming formulation. This granularity is consistent with t he superior performance metrics reported earlier, yet the method still showed limited plausibilit y in 

aligning boundaries with meaningful state transitions. For example, in Trials 1 and 2, some 

identified boundaries appeared disconnected from the natural p erceptual вҖ“action progression 

observed in the behavioral data. 

Figure 4. Segmentation of five tr ials from a representative subject, with bocpd_pca1 (left) and 

SSEL (right). Figure 5. Segmentation of five trials from a representative subject, with kernel _rbf (left) and 

pelt_l2 (right) 

4.2 Identified Feature Plausibility 

To further investigate the basis of segmentation, we aggregated the top -channel weights identified 

across all subjects and trials. The feature maps were constructed by summing the normali zed 

weights of selected features (band Г— channel pairs) for each of t he four stages. This produced two -

dimensional heatmaps, where the y -axis represents five frequency bands (Theta, Alpha, BetaL, 

BetaH, Gamma) and the x -axis corresponds to the 14 EEG chann els in the Emotiv Epoch X headset. 

Color intensity reflects the aggre gated weight, thus capturing the relative importance of features 

across the population. 

The maps revealed distinct stage -specific signatures. In Stage 1, strong positive weights were 

obse rved for frontal and parietal sites (e.g., F7, F8, P7, FC6) in the Th eta and Gamma bands, 

indicating early engagement of frontal oscillations. This pattern is highly consistent with prior 

neurophysiological findings reported in the original dataset paper (Zhou et al., 2024) , which 

emphasize frontal вҖ“parietal synchrony during perceptual onset. In Stage 2, weights redistributed, with BetaL activity at FC5 and parietal sites (P7, P8) emerging 

as salient, alongside Alp ha modulation at FC5. The presence of BetaL at this stage is consistent 

with its role in top вҖ“down attentional control, reflecting the suppression of irrelevant sensory 

information and the stabilization of evidence accumulation (Dubey et al., 2023) . Concurrent Alpha 

activity suggests selective inhibition of distracting inputs (Foxe & Snyder, 2011) , supporting the 

transition from perception to evaluation. 

In Stage 3, Theta power at F7 became dominant, while BetaH at F8 was markedly suppressed. 

This combination reflects a shift t oward motor readiness: frontal Theta is associated with cognitiv e

control and sustained evidence monitoring (KarakaЕҹ, 2020) , whereas BetaH suppression in frontal 

and motor -related regions is widely linked to the release of motor inhi bition in preparation for 

action execution (Wagner et al., 2017) . Thus, the Stage 3 map plausibly captures the neural 

substrate of decision commitment and anticip atory motor control. 

Stage 4 demonstrated the strongest BetaL we ights at FC5, a pattern well aligned with the literature 

on movement -related event -related desynchronization (ERD) (Peter et al., 2022) . Right -hand 

motor execution is typically accompanied by bilateral BetaL ERD, especially over central and 

frontal electrodes. The persistence of this signature at the final stage provides strong convergent 

evidence that the SSEL frame work not only delineates stages algorithmically but also recover s

neurophysiologically interpretable features associated with motor output. 

Taken together, the orderly evolution of channel вҖ“band signatures across stages supports a 

trajectory -based view of c ognition, in which perceptual encoding, evaluative control, motor 

preparation, and execution emerge as temporally organized neurodynamic stages rather than 

isolated neural markers. This convergence between algorithmic segmentation and established 

neurophys iology provides strong evidence that the discovered stages correspond to meaningful 

cognitive processes. Figure 6. Stage 1 feature contribution heatmap sh owing aggregated top -channel weights (band Г— 

channel). 

Figure 7. Stage 2 feature contribution hea tmap showing aggregated top -channel weights (band Г— 

channel). 

Figure 8. Stage 3 feature contribution heatmap showing aggregated top -channel weights (band Г—

channel) Figure 9. Stage 4 feature contribution heatmap showing aggregated top -channel weights (band Г— 

channel). 

4.3 Evolutionary Search Landscape 

To visualize the evolutionary optimization process, we plotted snapshots of candidate solutions 

projected into a two -dimensional principal component space at generations 30, 60, and 90. The 

background c olormap represents the interpolated fitness landscape (lower values indicating better 

scores), and candidates are displayed as scattered poi nts with a separate colormap indicating their 

fitness. This projection was obtained by applying PCA to candidate vec tors across generations, 

with scores interpolated using cubic grid fitting. 

At generation 30, candidates were dispersed broadly across the s pace, reflecting extensive 

exploration. By generation 60, the distribution had begun converging toward the valley fl oor, with 

clusters forming in lower -scoring regions. At generation 90, the candidate distribution was much 

more concentrated, with most poin ts localized in a narrow band along the global minima. These 

progressive changes demonstrate the balance of explorat ion and exploitation in the evolutionary 

search, with early stages sampling broadly and later stages focusing on refinement around 

promising regions. Figure 10 . Snapshots of the evolutionary search process at generations 30, 60, and 90. Candidates 

are pl otted in PCA space, with color intensity indicating fitness (lower = better). The background 

field represents the interpolated fitness lands cape. 

To better capture the dynamics of the evolutionary search, we constructed 3D surface plots of the 

interpolate d fitness landscape with the trajectory of the best candidate per generation overlaid 

(Figures 11 -13 ). Extreme outliers were clipped to stabilize the colormap. Best candidates were 

projected into PCA space and connected temporally, with generation encoded by color along the 

trajectory. To enhance interpretability, each 3D surface plot was paired with a top -view projection, 

where the former emphasizes surface morphology and the latter reveals the optimization path 

across the valley floor. 

For both Subject A and Subject B, the trajectory showed an early descent into the fitness valley 

followed by gradual fine -tuning along the valley ridge. The temporal color progression confirmed 

a consistent improvement over generations. When the crossover rate was reduced fr om 0.7 to 0.2 ,

as shown in Figure 12 vs Figure 13 , the trajectory became less direct and exhibited detou rs in PCA 

space, suggesting the effect of crossover on recombination efficiency and convergence speed .Figure 11 . Joint 3D and top -view plots of the e volutionary search landscape for Subject A, showing 

the fitness surface (colored by score), the trajecto ry of the best candidate per generation (colored 

by temporal order), and the alignment of the trajectory with the valley floor. 

Figure 12 . Joint 3D an d top -view plots of the evolutionary search landscape for Subject B. Figure 13 . Joint 3D and top -view plots of the evolutionary search landscape for Subject B with a 

crossover rate of 0.2. 

Furthermore, we systematically varied the mutation standard devia tion ( Ој) and crossover rate ( ПҮ) 

to quantify their influence on convergence dynamics. Best -of -ge neration score curves were plotted 

across generations for each parameter configuration. For mutation, as shown in Figure 14 , larger 

Ој values promoted exploration and faster convergence, but they prod uced noisier trajectories and 

led to premature convergenc e. In contrast, smaller values (e.g., Ој = 0.05) facilitated steady 

improvement and ultimately achieved the best overall performance. For crossover, moderate -to -

high rates ( ПҮ = 0.60, ПҮ = 0.80) generally produced faster convergence compared to lower crossove r

(ПҮ = 0.40), which stagnated earlier. These patterns are consistent with the theoretical trade -off 

between exploration and exploitation: mutation injects divers ity, while crossover accelerates the 

exploitation of promising solutions. Overall , these result s demonstrate that the evolutionary search 

in our self -supervised framework is tunable, with optimal configurations balancing low mutation 

and high crossover to achieve both robustness and efficiency. And t his sensitivity to evolutionary 

parameters highlig hts that discovering neurodynamic structure is not a deterministic optimization 

problem, but an exploration of a rugged landscape shaped by competing cognitive c onstraints such 

as stability, distinctness, and reproducibility. Figure 14 . Comparison of bes t-of -generation score curves under varying mutation (left) and 

crossover (right) rates. Lower scores indicate better performance. Mutation governs exploration, 

whereas crossover governs exploitation speed. 

4.4 Stability Analysis of Top Candidates 

To evaluate the reliability of the segmentation, we quantified boundary stability using the 

normalized mean absolute deviation (MAD/T), which measures the variability of boundary 

placement across the top candidate s olutions, scaled by trial length. This metric directly reflects 

how reproducibly the algorithm locates stage transitions under stochastic evolutionary search. 

Figure 15 . Boundary stability across subjects fo r five trials. Each subplot shows the distribu tion of 

normalized mean absolute deviation (MAD/T) of boundary positions for the three identified 

boundaries (B1, B2, B3) and the overall average. Lower MAD/T values indicate more consistent 

boundary placement across the top candidates. A Friedman test ac ross boundaries (B1, B2, B3, pooled across all trials) revealed no significant 

differences in stability ( ПҮВІ = 0.081, p = 0.96), indicating that the three boundaries were comparably 

stable and the algorithm was not biased toward one transition being noisier than others. A Kruskal вҖ“

Wallis test across trials indicated only a trend toward differences in overall boundary stability ( ПҮВІ 

= 9.29, p = 0.054). Post -hoc DunnвҖҷs tests with Holm correction did not identify any significant 

pairwise differences. These result s suggest that segmentation stability is consistent across both 

boundaries and trials, highlighting the generalizability of our method across diverse task contexts. 

In addition, t he comparable stability across boundaries suggests that no single cognitive t ransition 

disproportionately dominates variability, supporting the interpretation that each stage transition 

represents a robust and recurrent cognitive event rather than a noisy artifact of the segmentation 

process. 

Figure 16 . Heatmaps of Jaccard s imilarity for the top -8 features across top 5 candidates in each 

stage, shown for representative subjects. Bright yellow cells indicate high overlap (robust feature convergence), whereas darker colors reflect variability. Heatmaps from all subjects can be found 

in Appendix. 

To evaluate the stability of feature usage across candidates, we extracted the top -8 features (by 

absolute weight) from each candidate within a stage and computed the pairwise Jaccard similarity. 

The resulting heatm aps (Figure 16 ) quant ify how consistently the top candidates selected the same 

features across runs. High Jaccard similarity across candidates means that the algorithm 

consistently converges on the same subset of EEG channels and frequency bands. This impl ies the 

representatio nal structure extracted by SSEL is not an artifact of stochastic search, but reflects 

reproducible neural dynamics that generalize across runs. 

Stages 2 and 3 showed high similarity, even approaching 1.0, indicating strong convergence toward 

a common repre sentational basis. This suggests that evidence evaluation and motor readiness are 

associated with more canonical neural signatures, making them easier to capture robustly. This 

also provides confidence that these stages represent meani ngful cognitive state s rather than noise -

driven partitions. The identified stable feature -channel pairs can inform future data collection by 

highlighting the most informative sensors and frequency bands. For instance, if FC5 BetaL 

consistently appears, fut ure studies may prior itize denser sampling in central/motor regions. In 

practice, stable channel sets also mean that classifiers or control policies built on top of these 

features are less likely to overfit to specific runs, improving generalization to uns een data and new 

subj ects. 

By contrast, Stages 1 and 4 exhibited lower overlap, reflecting greater variability in how perceptual 

onset and execution -related dynamics were represented. This also suggests greater inter -individual 

flexibility in how brains im plement these transit ions, whereas the high convergence of features in 

Stages 2 and 3 indicates shared mechanisms. 

These heatmaps can be seen as subject -level вҖңfingerprintsвҖқ, and reflect genuine inter -individual 

differences in how neural features are recr uited. For EEG -based applications, instead of assuming 

uniform transferability across all subjects, the heatmaps can provide a principled way to quantify 

вҖңclosenessвҖқ to guide transfer learning. If we want to transfer a model trained on one subject to 

anoth er, we would ideally choose pairs with similar Jaccard similarity structures. In practice, we 

can cluster subjects by Jaccard similarity patterns to identify which individuals are likely to benefit 

from shared models and which need more personalized calibr ation. 

Overall, these stability analyses demonstrate that SSEL recovers neurodynamic structures that are 

simultaneously robust across runs, interpretable at the cognitive level, and sensitive to individual 

differences, reinforcing its suitability for model ing both shared and p ersonalized decision 

dynamics. 5 Discussion and Conclusion 

5.1 Rationale for Evolutionary Search in Self -Supervised Neurodynamic Segmentation 

Although SSL provides the foundation for mining temporal neurodynamic structure, the choice of 

evolutionary searc h over gradient -based optimization is central to the problem formulation 

addressed in this study . The primary unknowns in our framework are temporal bou ndaries рқңҸ $ =

Bрқ‘Ў C

> $

, рқ‘Ў D

> $

, рқ‘Ў E

> $

F , which are discrete indices defining stage transitions in continuous EEG. These 

boundaries are inherently non -differentiable, and although continuous relaxations are possible ,

they tend to be unstable and sensitive t o noise. E volutionary search , however, naturally supports 

joint optimization over discrete and continuous variables without requiring differentiable 

approximations. 

More fundamentally, our objective integrates multiple criteria (including withi n-stage 

pred ictability, boundary contrast, cross -trial alignment, and sparsity ), many of which involve sub -

model fitting , ranking operations, or hard selection mechanisms. These components yield a no n-

smooth and highly irregular optimization landscape that violates th e assumption underlying 

gradient descent. E volutionary search requires only the ability to evaluating candidate solutions, 

making it robust to non -differentiability and heterogeneous objective components .

Temporal segmentation of EEG further highly non -co nvex search space, where small shifts in 

boundar y placement can lead to large change s in model fit or contrast measures. Gradient descent 

would easily get stuck in poor local optima. Population -based e volutionary search however 

maintain multipl e candidate solutions in parallel , preserving diversity and enabling explor ation 

across multiple basins of attraction. This global search capability is particularly important given 

the short trial durations, high nois e levels, and inter -trial variability c haracteristi c of EEG data. 

Evolutionary search also enables interpretability via sparsity. The sparse weights рқ‘Ө I are enforced 

by keeping only the top few features. This hard thresholding is non -differentiable. Gradient -based 

methods would need soft approximations (like Lasso), which however would blur interpretability. 

Evolutionary perturbation can directly tu rn fea tures on/off, thus being able to yield clear electrode 

Г— band sets as transparent and analyzable neurodynamic signatures. 

Finally, evolutionary search provides a flexible mechanism for incorporating behavioral priors (e.g. 

minimum segment length, tr ial al ignment constraints) directly into the optimization process . These 

priors can be encoded as rules or constraints d epending on the context of the real -world time -series. 

However, this is hard in gradient -based methods, unless these rules can be framed as di fferentiable 

penalties, which is not always possible. 

5.2 Neurodynamic Interpretation and Cognitive Mechanisms 

The stage structures and feature manifolds discovered by the proposed framework can be 

interpreted through the lens of perceptual decision -making as a neurodynamic trajectory. Across 

subjects and trials, the learned segmentations consistently revealed a progression that aligns with well -established phases of decision formation: sensory appraisal, evidence evaluation, motor 

readiness, and acti on exe cution or commitment. Importantly, these stages were not imposed a priori, 

but emerged endogenously from the temporal structure of EEG activity. 

From a cognitive neurodynamics perspective, this finding supports the view that decision making 

unfolds a s a mo vement through latent neural state space, where distinct processing stages 

correspond to metastable regions separated by relatively sharp transitions. Early stages are 

characterized by frontal вҖ“parietal engagement and broadband oscillatory activity as sociat ed with 

sensory integration and contextual appraisal, whereas intermediate stages exhibit signatures 

consistent with sustained evidence accumulation and top вҖ“down control. The emergence of a 

distinct motor readiness stage , marked by frontal theta enha ncemen t and beta suppression ,

highlights a transitional regime in which action is prepared but withheld, a phenomenon widely 

reported in both human and animal studies of decision commitment. 

Beyond the shared stage sequence, the learned identity manifolds reveal ed systematic individual 

differences in how these stages are instantiated. While the order of stages remained largely 

invariant across subjects, the duration, boundary sharpness, and feature composition of each stage 

varied. These differences can be interp reted as markers of cognitive style or decision -making 

phenotype, reflecting how individuals trade off speed, caution, and evidence requirements under 

uncertainty. For example, prolonged evaluative stages may correspond to more conservative 

decision strate gies, whereas compressed intermediate stages may reflect rapid commitment once 

perceptual clarity is achieved. 

At a higher theoretical level, the discovered trajectories resonate with dynamical systems accounts 

of cognition, in which neural activity evolve s toward attractor -like states corresponding to 

decisions or actions. In this framing, cognitive processing is not defined by discrete symbolic 

operations, but by the systemвҖҷs trajectory through a structured landscape shaped by task demands 

and indiv idual predispositions. The SSEL framework provides a computational instantiation of 

this idea by explicitly discovering the boundaries and manifolds that organize such trajectories 

from continuous neural data. 

This interpretation reframes EEG not as a coll ection of features to be decoded, but as a temporal 

process that carries meaning in its evolution. By modeling progression itself as the primary object 

of learning, the proposed approach aligns closely with cognitive neurodynamic theories that 

emphasize ti me, st ructure, and internal state evolution as fundamental to cognition. 

5. 3 Connection to Cognitive Resilience , Redundancy and Quantum -Inspired Perspectives 

Building on this neurodynamic interpretation, the variability observed across subjects can be 

unde rstood not as noise, but as an expression of cognitive resilience and redundancy. As shown in 

our results, different subjects recruit partially different neurophysiological features even though 

they performed the same cognitive task and followed a simi lar decision -making progressive 

pattern. We acknowledge this as echo ing the resilience and redundancy principles in the human mind , and , most importantly, design conceptual ly parallel methodology to accommodate this 

variability .

In the human brain , multiple re dundant neural circuits often encode similar cognitive functions 

(e.g., motor planning distributed across frontal and parietal regions (Svoboda & Li, 2018) ). This 

redundancy ensures resilience because if on e pathway is disrupted (noise, fatigue, lesion), others 

can compensate (Stern et al., 2019) . Cognitive resilience thus emerges from maintaining multiple 

internal hypotheses in parallel. Evolutionary search operates under an analogous principle. A 

population of candidate segmentations represents parallel hypotheses about temporal structure and 

feature relevance . Population d iversity prevents premature convergence to suboptimal solution s

(Sudholt, 2019) , elitism preserves high -performing candidates , and mutation sustains exploration, 

which mirror how neural redundancy and variability support robust cognitive function .

Th is parallel also resonates with ideas from quantum -inspired models of parallelism , where 

multiple possibilities coexist until selection collapses the system toward a dominant state (Brody, 

2023) . Similarly, evolutionary population s maintain a distribution over candid ate sol utions, with 

selection acting to concentrate probability mass on higher -fitness structures while stochastic 

variation prevents overcommitment to a single trajectory. In both cases, redundancy and diversity 

serve as safeguards against noise and uncer tainty. 

Importantly, t here principles are not merely pragmatic design choices for handling stochastic, non -

stationary EEG signals . They reflect deeper mechanisms of cognitive resilience and uncertainty 

management . Selection pressure in evolutionary search functio ns as a form of hypothesis 

evaluation, analogous to the brainвҖҷs error monitoring systems (anterior cingulate, prefrontal cortex) 

that assess whether ongoing cognitive states align with expected dynamics. In this sense, SSEL 

exhibits a rudimentary form of t he metacognitive intelligence , i.e., maintaining, evaluating, and 

refining internal models of temporal structure to support robust and adaptive inference. 

5. 4 From Statistical Inference to Temporal Self -Reflection 

The distin ction between learning and stat istical inference has long occupied a central place in both 

machine intelligence and neuroscience (Bzdok et al., 2018) . Statistical inference detects whether 

a signal has shifted under predefined criteria, but remains hypothesis -driven , externally specified, 

and non -adapti ve. Learning -based methods (including supervised, unsupervised, and 

reinforcement learning), in contrast, construct internal representations that improve with 

exp erience and generalize beyond fixed thresholds. 

Most existing EEG segmentation methods fall in to inference - or supervision -driven paradigms. 

Statistical methods detect change point s on bandpower or functional connectivity features to 

delineate cognitive st ages (Brodsky et al., 1999; Koerner et al., 2017) , capturing distributional 

shifts but lacking an internal model of temporal progression. Supervised deep networks classify 

pre -labeled intervals and achieve stro ng discrimination (Lawhern et al., 2016; Saeidi et al., 2 021) ,

yet depend on costly annotations a nd often generalize poorly across subjects. Recent self -supervised approaches, primarily through contrastive objectives and applied for sleep staging (Lee 

et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2024a) , reduces labeling requireme nts, but largely follow 

a pretrain вҖ“finetune pipeline, where segmentation remains window -based and final stage 

definitions rely on human expert scoring. In the se frameworks, self -supervis ion impr oves 

representation quality but does not endow the system with awareness of temporal progression. 

In contrast to inference -based segmentation, the proposed framework enables a form of temporal 

self -reflection, in which the system models not only what state it is in, but how it arrived there 

through an evolving cognit ive trajectory. Our framework departs from t he previous paradigms by 

operating entirely without external labels and treating temporal boundary discovery as the primary 

objective. Rather than tes ting for change or classifying predefined states, the system learns stage 

transitions directly from intrinsic tempora l structure, forming an internal representation of 

progression. This shift aligns more closely with theoretical neuroscience, where cogniti on emerges 

from neural dynamics (Durstewitz, 2003; Goel & Buonomano, 2014) rather than isolated 

inferential tests, and temporal sequence retention is a fundamental em ergent computational ability 

(Hopfield, 1982) .

Th e developed methodology also echoes the trend that evolve from external to internal 

reinforcemen t learning. Traditional reinforcement learning depends on explicit external rewards, 

but in many real -world scenarios , such as EEG -driven human вҖ“robot collaboration, such rewards 

are scarce or even unattainable. To address these limitations, researchers hav e developed intrinsic 

learning signals, such as curiosity (Pathak et al., 2017) , prediction error (Burda et al., 2018) , or 

entropy maximization (Liu & Abbee l, 2021) . Agents trained to maximize entropy have learned 

locomotion skills (walking, jumping) without external guid ance (Eysenbach et al., 2018) , and 

intrinsic error -based rew ards have enabled agents to surpass human performance in Atari games 

without demonstrations (Burda et al., 2018) . These approaches align with principles of exploration 

and uncertainty reduction, echoing the вҖңfree -energy principleвҖқ in cognitive neuroscience (Friston, 

2010) . Yet they rema in focused on exploring action spaces and optimizing tasks. Our method 

cultivates awareness of internal temporal evolution. The agent does not learn what to do next , but 

where it is in its own cognitive process. 

5. 5 Implications for Resilient and Progressi on -Aware Intelligent Systems 

Metacognitive awareness of temporal progression opens new frontiers for artificial intelligence in 

smart civil and infrastructure syste ms. Most current applications rely on prediction -focused 

machine learning to forecast events or continuous variables. For example, in disaster , climate , and 

flooding management , supervised spatiotemporal modes are used to predict rainfall to flood extent 

(Xiao et al., 2025) ; in traffic monitoring, flow, congestion, and demand are forecasted 

(Afandizadeh et al., 2024) . In complex, interacti ng real -world environments, however, directly 

mapping high -dimensional inputs to predi ctions is often brittle (D'Amour et al., 2022; Geirhos et 

al., 2020) . Although attention -mechanisms partially address this limitation (Vaswani et al., 2017) ,their effectiveness depends on being context -aware , specifically, knowing which features are 

relevant at different stages ; therefore, explicit stage -progression awareness is critical. 

What many resilience and post -event analysis frameworks ultimately require is not sharper 

prediction, but self -reflection , i.e., the ability to recognize internal transitions to ward vulnerabili ty 

or failure. Our framework formalizes this capability by enabling models to infer temporal stage 

boundaries and dominant features directly from ten times high er -dimensional time -series data, 

without external supervision. Rather than label ing conditions o r predicting future values, the 

system learns to identify tipping points and determine which features are most influential at each 

stage. This capability is particularly valuable in resilience -oriented settings, where preparedness is 

inhere ntly staged (e.g ., watch вҶ’ warning вҶ’ immine nt failure), and early recognition of internal 

transitions is often more actionable than precise timing forecasts. 

More broadly , todayвҖҷs smart systems implement the perception вҖ“action progression in a fragmented 

manner. For sensing (perception), smart systems gather data , such as IoT sensors, traffic cameras, 

flood gauges, structural health monitors. For processing (representation), they run predictive 

models ( machine learning for traffic, hydrological models for f looding, ri sk indices for resilience). 

For actuation (action), responses like adaptive traffic lights, automated floodgates, smart HVAC 

adjustments, or transit re -routing are available. However, these stages are often decoupled and 

governed by low -level li near statis tical inference, for example, threshold -based triggers ( if water 

level > X, open gate; if congestion index > Y, reroute ). The key advancement of our self -supervised, 

progression -aware framework is its ability to understand readiness in the perce ption -action loop 

from their own unfolding internal dynamics. It is not to replac e the existing machine learning 

pipelines, but add an important layer of self -reflection for dynamically weighing based on internal 

transitio ns. 

Another direct application of progression -aware learning is in EEG -based human вҖ“robot 

collaboration . Existing EEG -driven robotic systems typically decod e neural signals into discrete 

commands such as pick or place, resume or stop (Zhou et al., 2025a) . Due to the low signal -to -

noise ratio of human EEG signals, additional mechanisms are often embedded to avoid false alarms ;

however , this can r educe sensitivity to genuine inten t expression. Human decision -making , unfolds 

progressive ly: before action initiation, individuals often enter a motor readiness state in which 

action is prepared but withheld. Being able to track th e progression of decision dynamics is 

particularly critica l in complex or ambiguous situations. As demonstrated in this study, this 

readiness state is neurophysiologically distinct and temporally identifiable. A p ractical benefit can 

be illustrated in an EE G-driven robotic wheelchair at an intersection: recognizi ng that a user is 

prepared to move but waiting for a pedestrian to pass would allow the system to initiate motion 

immediately upon clearance, without requiring an explicit вҖңresumeвҖқ command. Such fine -grained 

intent awareness can significantly improve fluid ity, safety, and user experience in BCI applications .

This notion of progression awareness and readiness state also extends to autonomous driving ,

where current end -to -end pipelines often map sensory inputs directly to actuation controls such as steering a ngle or speed (Navarro et al. , 2021) . The absence of explicit intermediate readiness or 

progression states can render such systems fragile under unexpected scenarios. Incorporating 

progression -aware representations inspired by human motor planning may improve robustness and 

adaptabil ity. 

5.6 Generality of the Framework 

Although the proposed framework is evaluated using a road -crossing task involving safety -critical 

decision -making , its formulation is not task -specific. SSEL does not rely on externally defined 

labels, task -specific ann otations, or domain -dependent heuristics. Instead, it assumes only that 

cognition unfolds through temporally organized, stage -like neurodynamic regimes, an assumption 

shared b y a wide range of cognitive processes . From a cognitive perspective, many tasks i n

experimental psychology and neuroscience exhibit similar progression structures. For example, 

perceptual decision -making tasks involving motion discrimination or signal dete ction typically 

involve stages of sensory evidence accumulation, uncertainty reso lution, and commitment. 

Working memory tasks exhibit transitions between encoding, maintenance, and retrieval, each 

associated with distinct oscillatory and network -level sign atures. Metacognitive confidence 

judgments involve additional stages in which int ernal representations are evaluated and revised. 

In principle, the same self -supervised evolutionary framework could be applied to continuous EEG 

collected during these tasks to discover task -specific yet structurally analogous neurodynamic 

progressions, w ithout requiring predefined stage boundaries or trial annotations. 

Beyond laboratory paradigms, the identity manifold perspective introduced in this work 

generalizes to settin gs where stable, person -specific neurodynamic signatures are critical. In brain вҖ“

computer interfaces, such manifolds could support long -term personalization and adaptation by 

distinguishing enduring cognitive traits from transient states. In clinical monito ring, progression -

aware segmentation may enable early detection of deviations fro m a patientвҖҷs typical 

neurodynamic trajectory, providing individualized baselines for assessing cognitive fatigue, 

decline, or recovery. Importantly, these applications benefi t from the same intrinsic properties 

demonstrated here: robustness to noise, resi stance to spoofing, and interpretability of stage -specific 

neural signatures. 

Acknowledg ment s

The work presented in this paper was supported financially by the United Sta tes National Science 

Foundation (NSF) via Award# SCC -IRG 2124857. The support of th e NSF is gratefully 

acknowledged. Any opinions and findings in this paper are those of the authors and do not 

necessarily represent those of the NSF. 

Statements and Declarations Competing Interests 

The authors declare that they have no competing interests. 

References 

Adams, R. P., & MacKay, D. J. (2007). Bayesian online changepoint detection . arXiv preprint 

arXiv:0710.3742 .

Adobe. (2023). Creating a Motion tween animation. Retrieved from 

https://helpx.adobe.com/animate/using/creating_a_motion_tween_ani mation.html 

Afandizadeh, S., Abdolahi, S., & Mirzahossein, H. (2024). Deep Learning Algorithms for Traffic 

Forecasting: A Comprehensive Review and Comparison with Classical Ones. Journal of 

Advanced Transportation, 2024 (1), 9981657. 

Aissa, N. E. H. S. B., Korichi, A., Lakas, A., Kerrache, C. A., & Calafate, C. T. (2024). Assessing 

robustness to adversarial attacks in attention -based networks: Case of EEG -based moto r

imagery classification. SLAS technology, 29 (4), 100142. 

Alahaideb, L., Al -Nafjan, A., Aljum ah, H., & Aldayel, M. (2025). Brain -Computer Interface for 

EEG -Based Authentication: Advancements and Practical Implications. Sensors (Basel), 

25 (16). 

Ali, A. S., Mahmood, S. A., Saeed, M., Konin, A., Zia, M. Z., & Tran, Q. -H. (2025). Joint Self -

Supervised Video Alignment and Action Segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.16832 .

Aminikhanghahi, S., & Cook, D. J. (2017). A Survey of Methods for Time Series Change Poi nt 

Detection. Knowl Inf Syst, 51 (2), 339 -367. 

Arlot, S., Celisse, A., & Harchaoui, Z. (2019). A kernel multiple change -point algorithm via 

model selection. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 20 (162), 1 -56. 

Baraku, T., Stergiadis, C., Veloudis, S., & Kla dos, M. A. (2024). Personalized user authentication 

system using wireless EEG headset and mac hine learning. Brain Organoid and Systems 

Neuroscience Journal, 2 , 17 -22. 

Bermant, P. C., Brickson, L., & Titus, A. J. (2022). Bioacoustic event detection with sel f-

supervised contrastive learning. bioRxiv , 2022.2010. 2012.511740. 

Bhati, S., Villalba, J., Е»elasko, P., Moro -Velazquez, L., & Dehak, N. (2022). Unsupervised 

speech segmentation and variable rate representation learning using segmental 

contrastive predict ive coding. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language 

Processing, 30 , 2002 -2014. 

Borst, J. P., & Anderson, J. R. (2015). The discovery of processing stages: analyzing EEG data 

with hidden semi -Markov models. Neuroimage, 108 , 60 -73. 

Brill, S., Kumar Debnath, A., Payre, W., Horan, B., & Birrell, S. (2024). Factors influencing the 

percept ion of safety for pedestrians and cyclists through interactions with automated 

vehicles in shared spaces. Transportation Research Part F: Traffic Psychology and 

Behaviour, 107 , 181 -195. 

Brodsky, B. E., Darkhovsky, B. S., Kaplan, A. Y., & Shishkin, S. L. (19 99). A nonparametric 

method for the segmentation of the EEG. Comput Methods Programs Biomed, 60 (2), 93 -

106. 

Brody, D. C. (2023). Quantum formalism for the dynamics of cognitive psycholo gy. Scientific 

Reports, 13 (1), 16104. Burda, Y., Edwards, H., Storkey, A., & Klimov, O. (2018). Exploration by random network 

distillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.12894 .

Bzdok, D., Altman, N., & Krzywinski, M. (2018). Statistics versus machine learning. Nature 

methods, 15 (4), 233 -234. 

Chan, H. -L., Kuo, P. -C., Cheng, C. -Y., & Chen, Y. -S. (2018). Challenges and Future Perspectives 

on Electroencephalogram -Based Biometrics in Person Recognition. Frontiers in 

Neuroinformatics, Volume 12 - 2018 .

Chen, X., Jia, T., & Wu, D. (2025). Data alignment based adversarial defense benchmar k for 

EEG -based BCIs. Neural Netw., 188 (C), 25. 

Chen, X., Meng, L., Xu, Y., & Wu, D. (2024). Adversarial artifact detection in EEG -based brain вҖ“

computer interfaces. Journal of Neural Eng ineering, 21 (5), 056043. 

Chen, X., Sun, Y., Zhang, M., & Peng, D. (2020 ). Evolving deep convolutional variational 

autoencoders for image classification. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, 

25 (5), 815 -829. 

Chien, H. -Y. S., Goh, H., Sandino, C. M. , & Cheng, J. Y. (2022). Maeeg: Masked auto -encoder 

for eeg representat ion learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.02625 .

Cochran, W., Cooley, J., Favin, D., Helms, H., Kaenel, R., Lang, W., Jr, G. C., Nelson, D., Rader, 

C., & Welch, P. (1967). What is the fas t Fourier transform? Proceedings of the IEEE, 15 ,

1664 -1674. 

D'Amour, A ., Heller, K., Moldovan, D., Adlam, B., Alipanahi, B., Beutel, A., Chen, C., Deaton, 

J., Eisenstein, J., & Hoffman, M. D. (2022). Underspecification presents challenges for 

credibility in modern machine learning. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 23 (22 6), 

1-61. 

Dai, R. -J., Hu, K., Yin, H., Lu, B. -L., & Zheng, W. -L. (2025). Self -Supervised EEG 

Representation Learning Based on Temporal Prediction and Spatial Reconstruction for 

Emotion Recognition. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the Annual Meeting o f the 

Cognitive Science Society. 

De Clercq, K., Dietrich, A., NГәГұez Velasco, J. P., De Winter, J., & Happee, R. (2019). External 

human -machine interfaces on automated vehicles: Effects on pedestrian crossing 

decisions. Human Factors, 61 (8), 1353 -1370. 

Debi e, E., Moustafa, N., & Whitty, M. T. (2020). A privacy -preserving generative adversarial 

network method for securing EEG brain signals. Paper presented at the 2020 

International Joint C onference on Neural Networks (IJCNN). 

Deldari, S., Xue, H., Saeed, A., He, J., Smith, D. V., & Salim, F. D. (2022). Beyond just vision: A 

review on self -supervised representation learning on multimodal and temporal data. arXiv 

preprint arXiv:2206.02353 .

Du bey, A., Markowitz, D. A., & Pesaran, B. (2023). Top -down control of ex ogenous attentional 

selection is mediated by beta coherence in prefrontal cortex. Neuron, 111 (20), 3321 -

3334.e3325. 

Durstewitz, D. (2003). Self -organizing neural integrator predicts int erval times through climbing 

activity. Journal of Neuroscience, 23 (12), 5342 -5353. 

EMOTIV. (2023). EmotivPRO v3.0. Retrieved from https://emotiv.gitbook.io/emotivpro -v3/dat a-

streams/frequency -bands 

Eysenbach, B., Gupta, A., Ibarz, J., & Levine , S. (2018). Diversity is all you need: Learning 

skills without a reward function. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.06070 .Foxe, J., & Snyder, A. (2011). The Role of Alpha -Band Brain Oscillations as a Sensory 

Suppressi on Mechanism during Selective Attention. Fron tiers in Psychology, 2 (154). 

Friston, K. (2010). The free -energy principle: a unified brain theory? Nature Reviews 

Neuroscience, 11 (2), 127 -138. 

Fu, T., Hu, W., Miranda -Moreno, L., & Saunier, N. (2019). Investig ating secondary pedestrian -

vehicle interactio ns at non -signalized intersections using vision -based trajectory data. 

Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, 105 , 222 -240. 

Gee, A. H., Chang, J., Ghosh, J., & Paydarfar, D. (2018). Bayesian Onli ne Changepoint 

Detection Of Physiological Tra nsitions. Annu Int Conf IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc, 2018 , 45 -

48. 

Geirhos, R., Jacobsen, J. -H., Michaelis, C., Zemel, R., Brendel, W., Bethge, M., & Wichmann, F. 

A. (2020). Shortcut learning in deep neural networks. Nature Machine Intelligence, 2 (11), 

665 -673. 

Gerogiannis, A., & Bode, N. W. F. (2024). Analysis of long -term observational data on 

pedestrian road crossings at unmarked locations. Safety Science, 172 , 106420. 

Goel, A., & Buonomano, D. V. (2014). Timing as a n intrinsic property of neural networks: 

evid ence from in vivo and in vitro experiments. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal 

Society B: Biological Sciences, 369 (1637), 20120460. 

Gramfort, A., Luessi, M., Larson, E., Engemann, D. A., Strohmeier, D., Brodbeck, C., Goj, R., 

Jas, M., Brooks, T., Park konen, L., & HГӨmГӨlГӨinen, M. (2013). MEG and EEG data 

analysis with MNE -Python. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 7 .

Gretton, A., Borgwardt, K. M ., Rasch, M. J., SchГ¶lkopf, B., & Smola, A. (2012). A kernel two -

sample test. The journal of machine learning research, 13 (1), 723 -773. 

Habashi, A. G., Azab, A. M., Eldawlatly, S., & Aly, G. M. (2023). Generative adversarial 

networks in EEG analysis: an ov erview. J Neuroeng Rehabil, 20 (1), 40. 

Harchaoui, Z., Moulines, E., & Bach, F. (2008). Kernel change -point analysis. Ad vances in 

Neural Information Processing Systems, 21 .

Hopfield, J. J. (1982). Neural networks and physical systems with emergent collectiv e

computational abilities. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 79 (8), 2554 -

2558. 

Hu, K., Dai, R. -J., Chen, W. -T., Yin, H. -L., Lu, B. -L., & Zheng, W. -L. (2024). Contrastive Self -

supervised EEG Representation Learning for Emotion Classification. Paper presented at 

the 2024 46th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and 

Biology Socie ty (EMBC). 

Huang, Y., Chen, Y., Xu, S., Wu, D., & Wu, X. (2025). Self -Supervised Learning with Adaptive 

Frequency -Time Attention Transfor mer for Seizure Prediction and Classification. Brain 

Sciences, 15 (4), 382. doi:10.3390/brainsci15040382 

Jalaly Bidgoly, A., Jalaly Bidgoly, H., & Arezoumand, Z. (2020). A survey on methods and 

challenges in EEG based authentication. Computers & Security, 93 , 101788. 

Jorge, J., van der Zwaag, W., & Figueiredo, P. (2014). EEG вҖ“fMRI integration for the study of 

human brain function. Neuroimage, 102 , 24 -34. 

KarakaЕҹ, S. (2020). A review of theta oscillation and its functional correlates. International 

Journal of Psychophysiology .

Khalil, A. E., Perez -Diaz, J. A., Cantoral -Ceballos, J. A., & Antelis, J. M. (2024). Unlocking 

Security for Comprehensive Electroenc ephalogram -Based User Authentication Systems. 

Sensors, 24 (24), 7919. doi:10.3390/s24247919 Killick, R., Fearnhead, P., & Eckley, I. A. (2012). Optimal Detection of Changepoints With a 

Linear Computational Cost. Journal of the American Statistical Associat ion, 107 (500), 

1590 -1598. 

Klem, G. H., LГјders, H. O., Jasper, H. H., & Elger, C. (1999). The ten -twenty electrode system 

of the International Federation. The International Federation of Clinical Neurophysiology. 

Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol Suppl, 52 , 3 -6. 

Koerner, F. S., Anderson, J. R., Fincham, J. M., & Kass, R. E . (2017). Change -point detection of 

cognitive states across multiple trials in functional neuroimaging. Stat Med, 36 (4), 618 -

642. 

Kostas, D., Aroca -Ouellette, S., & Rudzicz, F. (2021). B ENDR: Using transformers and a 

contrastive self -supervised learning ta sk to learn from massive amounts of EEG data. 

Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 15 , 653659. 

Kreuk, F., Keshet, J., & Adi, Y. (2020). Self -supervised contrastive learning for unsupervised 

phoneme segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.13465 .

Lander, S., & S hang, Y. (2015). EvoAE --a new evolutionary method for training autoencoders 

for deep learning networks. Paper presented at the 2015 IEEE 39th annual computer 

software and applications co nference. 

Lawhern, V., Solon, A., Waytowich, N., Gordon, S., Hung, C., & Lance, B. (2016). EEGNet: A 

Compact Convolutional Network for EEG -based Brain -Computer Interfaces. Journal of 

Neural Engineering, 15 .

Lee, S., Yu, Y., Back, S., Seo, H., & Lee, K. (20 24). SleePyCo: Automatic sleep scoring with 

feature pyramid and contra stive learning. Expert Systems With Applications, 240 , 122551. 

Li, Y., Chen, J., Li, F., Fu, B., Wu, H., Ji, Y., Zhou, Y., Niu, Y., Shi, G., & Zheng, W. (2022). 

GMSS: Graph -based multi -task self -supervised learning for EEG emotion recognition. 

Ieee Transac tions on Affective Computing, 14 (3), 2512 -2525. 

Li, Y., Hao, C., Li, P., Xiong, J., & Chen, D. (2021). Generic neural architecture search via 

regression. Advances in Neural Information P rocessing Systems, 34 , 20476 -20490. 

Liu, H., & Abbeel, P. (2021). Aps: Active pretraining with successor features. Paper presented at 

the International Conference on Machine Learning. 

Liu, Y., Xue, W., Yang, L., & Li, M. (2025). Deep Learning -Based EEG Emo tion Recognition: A 

Review. Brain Sci, 16 (1). 

Luo, T. Z., Kim, T. D., Gupta, D., Bondy, A. G., Kopec, C. D., Elliott, V. A., DePasquale, B., & 

Brody, C. D. (2025). Transitions in dynamical regime and neural mode during perceptual 

decisions. Nature, 646 (808 7), 1156 -1166. 

Mahini, R., Li, Y., Ding, W., Fu, R., Ristaniemi, T., N andi, A. K., Chen, G., & Cong, F. (2020). 

Determination of the Time Window of Event -Related Potential Using Multiple -Set 

Consensus Clustering. Front Neurosci, 14 , 521595. 

Maidstone, R., Hocking, T., Rigaill, G., & Fearnhead, P. (2017). On optimal multiple 

changepoint algorithms for large data. Stat Comput, 27 (2), 519 -533. 

Meng, L., Jiang, X., Chen, X., Liu, W., Luo, H., & Wu, D. (2024). Adversarial filtering based 

evasion and backdoor att acks to EEG -based brain -computer interfaces. Information 

Fusion, 107 , 102316. 

Meng, L., Jiang, X., Huang, J., Zeng, Z., Yu, S., Jung, T. -P., Lin, C. -T., Chavarriaga, R., & Wu, 

D. (2023). EEG -based brain вҖ“computer interfaces are vulnerable to backdoor attack s. Ieee 

Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering, 31 , 2224 -2234. Mohsenvand, M. N., Izadi, M. R., & Maes, P. (2020). Contrastive representation learning for 

electroencephalogram classification. Paper presented at the Machine learning f or health. 

Navarro, P. J., Miller, L., Rosique, F., FernГЎndez -Isla, C., & Gila -Navarro, A. (2021). End -to -End 

Deep Neural Network Architectures for Speed and Steering Wheel Angle Prediction in 

Autonomous Driving. Electronics, 10 (11), 1266. doi:10.3390/ele ctronics101 11266 

Ou, Y., Sun, S., Gan, H., Zhou, R., & Yang, Z. (2022). An improved self -supervised learning for 

EEG classification. Math. Biosci. Eng, 19 (7), 6907 -6922. 

Parr, T., Friston, K., & Pezzulo, G. (2024). Generative models for sequential dynamics in active 

inference. Cognitive Neurodynamics, 18 (6), 3259 -3272. 

Pathak, D., Agrawal, P., Efros, A. A., & Darrell, T. (2017). Curiosity -driven exploration by self -

supervi sed prediction. Paper presented at the International conference on machine 

learning. 

Peirce, J., Gray, J. R., Simpson, S., MacAskill, M., HГ¶chenberger, R., Sogo, H., Kastman, E., & 

LindelГёv, J. K. (2019). PsychoPy2: Experiments in behavior made easy. Behav ior 

Research Methods, 51 (1), 195 -203. 

Peter, J., Ferraioli, F., Mathew, D., George, S. , Chan, C., Alalade, T., Salcedo, S. A., Saed, S., 

Tatti, E., Quartarone, A., & Ghilardi, M. F. (2022). Movement -related beta ERD and ERS 

abnormalities in neuropsychiatri c disorders. Frontiers in Neuroscience, Volume 16 -

2022 .

Rafiei, M. H., Gauthier, L. V., Adeli, H., & Takabi, D. (2022). Self -supervised learning for 

electroencephalography. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, 

35 (2), 1457 -1471. 

Rehm an, T. U., Alruwaili, M., Siddiqi, M. H., Alhwaiti, Y., Anwar, S., Halim, Z., & Alam, M. 

(2025). Advancing EEG -based biometric identification through multi -modal data fusion 

and deep learning techniques. Complex & Intelligent Systems, 11 (9), 398. 

Rivas -Car rillo, S. D., Akkuratov, E. E., Valdez Ruvalcaba, H., Vargas -Sanchez, A., Komorowski, 

J., San -Juan, D., & Grabherr, M. G. (2023). MindReader: Unsupervised Classification of 

Electroencephalographic Data. Sensors (Basel), 23 (6). 

Saeidi, M., Karwowski, W., Fa rahani, F. V., Fiok, K., Taiar, R., Hancock, P. A., & Al -Juaid, A. 

(2021). Neural Deco ding of EEG Signals with Machine Learning: A Systematic Review. 

Brain Sci, 11 (11). 

Saibene, A., Ghaemi, H., & Dagdevir, E. (2024). Deep learning in motor imagery EEG sign al 

decoding: A Systematic Review. Neurocomputing, 610 , 128577. 

Sgouralis, I., & PressГ© , S. (2017). An Introduction to Infinite HMMs for Single -Molecule Data 

Analysis. Biophysical Journal, 112 (10), 2021 -2029. 

Shen, X., Tao, L., Chen, X., Song, S., Liu, Q., & Zhang, D. (2024). Contrastive learning of 

shared spatiotemporal EEG representations across individuals for naturalistic 

neuroscience. Neuroimage, 301 , 120890. 

Siddiqi, S. M., & Moore, A. W. (2005). Fast inference and learning in large -state -space HMMs. 

Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 22nd international conference on Machine 

lear ning. 

Sinn, M., Ghodsi, A., & Keller, K. (2012a). Detecting change -points in time series by maximum 

mean discrepancy of ordinal pattern distributions. arXiv preprint arXi v:1210.4903 .

Sinn, M., Ghodsi, A., & Keller, K. (2012b). Detecting change -points in ti me series by maximum 

mean discrepancy of ordinal pattern distributions . Paper presented at the Proceedings of the Twenty -Eighth Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial In telligence, Catalina Island, 

CA. 

Song, A. H., Chlon, L., Soulat, H., Tauber, J., Subr amanian, S., Ba, D., & Prerau, M. J. (2019). 

Multitaper Infinite Hidden Markov Model for EEG. Annu Int Conf IEEE Eng Med Biol 

Soc, 2019 , 5803 -5807. 

Stergiadis, C., Kostar idou, V. -D., Veloudis, S., Kazis, D., & Klados, M. A. (2022). A 

personalized user auth entication system based on EEG signals. Sensors, 22 (18), 6929. 

Stern, Y., Barnes, C. A., Grady, C., Jones, R. N., & Raz, N. (2019). Brain reserve, cognitive 

reserve, comp ensation, and maintenance: operationalization, validity, and mechanisms of 

cognitive r esilience. Neurobiol Aging, 83 , 124 -129. 

Sudholt, D. (2019). The benefits of population diversity in evolutionary algorithms: a survey of 

rigorous runtime analyses. Theor y of evolutionary computation: Recent developments in 

discrete optimization , 359 -404. 

Sun, R., Zhuang, X., Wu, C., Zhao, G., & Zhang, K. (2015). The estimation of vehicle speed and 

stopping distance by pedestrians crossing streets in a naturalistic traffic environment. 

Transportation Research Part F: Traffic Psychology and Behaviour, 30 , 97 -106. 

Sun, Y., Yen, G. G., & Yi, Z. (2018). Evolving unsupervised deep neural networks for learning 

meaningful representations. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computat ion, 23 (1), 89 -

103. 

Svoboda, K., & Li, N. (2018). Neural mechanisms of movement planni ng: motor cortex and 

beyond. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 49 , 33 -41. 

Tian, K., Markkula, G., Wei, C., Lee, Y. M., Madigan, R., Hirose, T., Merat, N., & Romano, R. 

(2024). Deconstructing Pedestrian Crossing Decisions in Interactions With Continuous 

Traf fic: An Anthropomorphic Model. Trans. Intell. Transport. Sys., 25 (3), 246 6вҖ“2478. 

Tognoli, E., & Kelso, J. A. (2014). The metastable brain. Neuron, 81 (1), 35 -48. 

Truong, C., Oudre, L., & Vayatis, N. (2018). ruptures: change point detection in Python. arXiv 

preprint arXiv:1801.00826 .

Truong, C., Oudre, L., & Vayatis, N. (2020). S elective review of offline change point detection 

methods. Signal Processing, 167 , 107299. 

Truong, Q. -T., Nguyen, D. T., Hua, B. -S., & Yeung, S. -K. (2024). Self -supervised video objec t

segmentation with distillation learning of deformable attention. arXiv preprint 

arXiv:2401.13937 .

Tucci, C., Biasi, L. D., Marco, F. D., Citarella, A. A., Greca, A. D., Amaro, I., & Tortora, G. 

(2025). Toward EEG Based Biometric Authentication in Virtual Reality: a Pilot Usability 

and Performance Study . Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 16th Biannual 

Conference of the Italian SIGCHI Chapter. https://doi.org/10.1145/3750069.3750093 

Vadher, H., Patel, P., Nair, A., Vyas, T., Desai, S., Gohil, L., Tanwar, S., Garg, D., & Singh, A. 

(2024). EEG -based biometric authentication system using convolutional neural 

network for military applications. SECURITY AND PRIVACY, 7 (2), e345. 

Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N ., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A. N., Kaiser, ЕҒ., & 

Polosukhin, I. (2017). Attention is all you need. Advances in Neural Information 

Processing Sys tems, 30 .

Vinhas, A., Correia, J., & Machado, P. (2025). Evolutionary Machine Learning Meets Self -

Supervised Learning: A Comprehensive Survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.07213 .Wagner, J., Wessel, J., Ghahremani, A., & Aron, A. (2017). Establishing a Right Frontal Beta 

Signature for Stopping Action in Scalp Electroencephalography: Implications for Testing 

Inhibitory Control in Other Task Contexts. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 30 , 1 -12. 

Wang, E. T., Vannucci, M., Haneef, Z., Moss, R., Rao, V. R., & Chia ng, S. (2022a). A Bayesian 

switching linear dynamical system for estimating seizure chronoty pes. Proceedings of the 

National Academy of Sciences, 119 (46), e2200822119. 

Wang, G., Liu, W., He, Y., Xu, C., Ma, L., & Li, H. (2024). Eegpt: Pretrained transforme r for 

universal and reliable representation of eeg signals. Advances in Neural Information 

Processing Systems, 37 , 39249 -39280. 

Wang, M., Wang, S., & Hu, J. (2022b). Cancellable template design for privacy -preserving EEG 

biometric authentication systems. IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and 

Security, 17 , 3350 -3364. 

Wang, X. J. (2012). N eural dynamics and circuit mechanisms of decision -making. Curr Opin 

Neurobiol, 22 (6), 1039 -1046. 

Wang, Y., Srinivasan, A. R., Jokinen, J. P. P., Oulasvirta, A., & M arkkula, G. (2025). Pedestrian 

crossing decisions can be explained by bounded optimal decisi on -making under noisy 

visual perception. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, 171 , 104963. 

Wang, Z., Chen, H., Li, X., Liu, C., Xiong, Y., Tighe, J., & Fowlkes, C. (2022c). Sscap: Self -

supervised co -occurrence action parsing for unsupervi sed temporal action segmentation. 

Paper presented at the Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications 

of Computer Vision. 

Weng, W., Gu, Y., Guo, S. , Ma, Y., Yang, Z., Liu, Y., & Chen, Y. (2025). Self -supervised learning 

for electroencephal ogram: A systematic survey. ACM Computing Surveys, 57 (12), 1 -38. 

Williams, N. J., Daly, I., & Nasuto, S. J. (2018). Markov Model -Based Method to Analyse Time -

Varying Networks in EEG Task -Related Data. Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience, 

Volume 12 - 20 18 .

Wu, D., Xu, J., Fang, W., Zhang, Y., Yang, L., Xu, X., Luo, H ., & Yu, X. (2023). Adversarial 

attacks and defenses in physiological computing: a systematic review. Natl Sci Open, 

2(1). 

Xia, K., Duch, W., Sun, Y., Xu, K., Fang, W., Luo, H., Zhang, Y., Sa ng, D., Xu, X., & Wang, F. -

Y. (2022). Privacy -preserving brain вҖ“co mputer interfaces: A systematic review. IEEE 

Transactions on Computational Social Systems, 10 (5), 2312 -2324. 

Xiao, J., Wang, Z., Liao, Y., Yi, Y., Zheng, L., Yang, B., Yu, H., Li, X., Hu, N., & Lai, C. (2025). 

A ConvLSTM -Based Model for Urban Flood Predict ion Under Dynamic Rainfall 

Patterns and Exploration on Its Extrapolation Capability. International Journal of 

Disaster Risk Science, 16 (6), 1057 -1073. 

Yang, B., Zhu, X., Liu, Y., & Liu, H. (2 021a). A single -channel EEG based automatic sleep stage 

classific ation method leveraging deep one -dimensional convolutional neural network and 

hidden Markov model. BIOMEDICAL SIGNAL PROCESSING AND CONTROL, 68 ,

102581. 

Yang, C., Lamdouar, H., Lu, E., Zisser man, A., & Xie, W. (2021b). Self -supervised video object 

segmenta tion by motion grouping. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF 

International Conference on Computer Vision. 

Yang, C., Xiao, C., Westover, M. B., & Sun, J. (2023). Self -supervised electroencephalogram 

representation learning for automatic sleep staging: model development and evaluation 

study. JMIR AI, 2 (1), e46769. Yao, J., Hong, Y., Wang, C., Xiao, T., He, T., Locatello, F., Wipf, D. P., Fu, Y., & Zhang, Z. 

(2022). Self -supervised amodal video object segmentation. Advances in Neural 

Information Processing Systems, 35 , 6278 -6291. 

YДұldДұz, Д°., Garner, R., Lai, M., & Duncan, D. (2022). Unsupervised seizure identification on 

EEG. Comput Methods Programs Biomed, 215 , 106604. 

Yue, L., Tra n, T. T. M., Yu, X., & Hoggenmueller, M. (2025). Enhancing Autono mous Vehicle -

Pedestrian Interaction in Shared Spaces: The Impact of Intended Path -Projection . Paper 

presented at the Proceedings of the Extended Abstracts of the CHI Conference on Human 

Facto rs in Computing Systems. https://doi.org/10.1145/3706599.3720174 

Zhang, J., Yang, L., Sajjadi Mohammadabadi, S. M., & Yan, F. (2025a). A survey on self -

supervised learning: Recent advances and open pr oblems. Neurocomputing, 655 , 131409. 

Zhang, M., Liu, D., Hu, S., Yan, X., Sun, Z., & Ye, Y. (2023). Self -supervised temporal 

autoencoder for egocentric action segmentation. Engineering Applications of Artificial 

Intelligence, 126 , 107092. 

Zhang, X., Wu, D. , Ding, L., Luo, H., Lin, C. -T., Jung, T. -P., & Chavarriaga, R. ( 2020). Tiny 

noise, big mistakes: adversarial perturbations induce errors in brain вҖ“computer interface 

spellers. National Science Review, 8 (4). 

Zhang, Z., Elahi, M. F., Domeyer, J., & Tian, R. (2025b). Driver temporal segmentation of 

pedestrian crossing inte ntions during negotiations. Transportation Research Part F: 

Traffic Psychology and Behaviour, 114 , 953 -969. 

Zhao, C., Wu, W., Zhang, H., Zhang, R., Zheng, X., & Kong, X. (2024a). Sleep Stage 

Classification Via Multi -View Based Self -Supervised Contrastive L earning of EEG. 

IEEE J Biomed Health Inform, 28 (12), 7068 -7077. 

Zhao, T., Cui, Y., Ji, T., Luo, J., Li, W., Jiang, J., Gao, Z., Hu, W., Yan, Y., Jiang, Y., & Hong, B. 

(2024b). VAEEG: Variatio nal auto -encoder for extracting EEG representation. 

Neuroimage, 304 , 120946. 

Zhou, X., & Liao, P. -C. (2022). A privacy -preserving data storage and service framework based 

on deep learning and blockchain for construction workers' wearable IoT sensors. arXiv 

preprint arXiv:2211.10713 .

Zhou, X., Menassa, C. C., & Kamat, V. R. (2024). Decoding Brain Dynamics in Motor Planning 

Based on E EG Microstates for Predicting Pedestrian Road -Crossing in Vehicle -to -

Everything Architectures. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.13955 .

Zhou, X., Menassa, C. C., & Kamat, V. R. (2025a). Feasibility of Embodied Dynamics Based 

Bayesian Learning for Continuous Pursuit Motion Control of Assistive Mobile Robots in 

the Built Environment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.17401 .

Zhou, X., Menassa, C. C. , & Kamat, V. R. (2025b). Siamese network with dual attention for 

EEG -driven social learning: Bridging the human -robot gap in long -tail autonomous 

driving. Expert Systems With Applications, 291 , 128470. 

Zou, H., Guo, Y., Wei, F., Guo, D., Li, Q., & Pirov, J. (2025). A pedestrian group crossing 

intention prediction model integrating spatiotemporal features. Scientific Reports, 15 (1), 

20675. Appendix 

Figure A1 Jaccard Similarity for Subject 0321 -1

Figure A2 Jaccard Similarity for Subject 0321 -2

Figur e A3 Jaccard Similarity for Subject 0321 -3

Figure A4 Jaccard Similarity for Subject 0321 -4Figure A5 Jaccard Similarity for Subject 0322 -1

Figure A6 Jaccard Similarity for Subject 0322 -2

Figure A7 Jaccard Similarity for Subject 0322 -3

Figure A8 Jaccard Similarity for Subject 0322 -4Figure A9 Jaccard Similarity for Subject 0323 -1

Figure A10 Jaccard Similarity for Subject 0323 -2

Figure A11 Jaccard Similarity for Subject 0323 -3

Figure A12 Jaccard Similarity for Subject 0323 -4