Title: Rich Insights from Cheap Signals: Efficient Evaluations via Tensor Factorization

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.02029v1

Published Time: Tue, 03 Mar 2026 04:11:45 GMT

Number of Pages: 43

Markdown Content:
> https://arxiv.org/abs/123 2026-03-03

# Rich Insights from Cheap Signals: Efficient Evaluations via Tensor Factorization 

Felipe Maia Polo 1,* , Aida Nematzadeh 2, Virginia Aglietti 2, Adam Fisch 2 and Isabela Albuquerque 2 

> 1University of Michigan, 2Google DeepMind

Moving beyond evaluations that collapse performance across heterogeneous prompts toward fine-grained evaluation at the prompt level, or within relatively homogeneous subsets, is necessary to diagnose generative models’ strengths and weaknesses. Such fine-grained evaluations, however, suffer from a data bottleneck: human gold-standard labels are too costly at this scale, while automated ratings are often misaligned with human judgment. To resolve this challenge, we propose a novel statistical model based on tensor factorization that merges cheap autorater data with a limited set of human gold-standard labels. Specifically, our approach uses autorater scores to pretrain latent representations of prompts and generative models, and then aligns those pretrained representations to human preferences using a small calibration set. This sample-efficient methodology is robust to autorater quality, more accurately predicts human preferences on a per-prompt basis than standard baselines, and provides tight confidence intervals for key statistical parameters of interest. We also showcase the practical utility of our method by constructing granular leaderboards based on prompt qualities and by estimating model performance solely from autorater scores, entirely eliminating the need for additional human annotations. 

Keywords: AI evaluation, fine-grained evaluation, efficient evaluation 

## 1. Introduction 

The widespread adoption and fast-paced development of generative artificial intelligence (AI) have made robust and insightful evaluation methodologies both more challenging and more relevant. As models become more capable, the limitations of traditional evaluation metrics, which typically aggregate performance into a single average score across a benchmark, are becoming increasingly apparent (Rodriguez et al., 2021; Zhuang et al., 2025). Unlike these overly coarse metrics, there is increasing interest in fine-grained evaluations, i.e. , assessments designed to isolate subtle differences in model performance at the level of individual prompts or narrow, more homogenous subsets of a benchmark 1. These approaches, often grounded in psychometric frameworks such as Item Response Theory (IRT) (Cai et al., 2016; Maia Polo et al., 2024a; Rodriguez et al., 2021; Yuan and Hu, 2025; Zhou et al., 2025), leverage fine-grained, prompt-level data to recover multidimensional skill profiles and identify the specific strengths and weaknesses of a model. Moreover, they enable the construction of prompt-level leaderboards, as well as leaderboards for relatively homogeneous groups of prompts (Frick et al., 2025). Such granular insights are crucial not only for model development but also for practical applications, such as dynamic model routing based on prompt difficulty or content (Frick et al., 2025; Somerstep et al., 2025; Song et al., 2025). The transition to fine-grained evaluation, i.e. , at the prompt level or within relatively homogeneous subsets, introduces a significant bottleneck: data scarcity. Establishing reliable estimates of model capability at lower levels requires a vast number of labels. If these labels are to be generated by human annotators, the evaluation process becomes prohibitively expensive and slow. Collecting 

> 1

In our context, “prompt” is equivalent to an instance of a task. For example, in a summarization benchmark, each document forms a distinct prompt, and in a question answering benchmark, each question represents a separate prompt.  

> Corresponding author(s): felipemaiapolo@gmail.com, isabelaa@google.com. *This project was completed while Felipe Maia Polo was an intern at Google DeepMind, hosted by Isabela Albuquerque.
> ©2026 Google. All rights reserved
> arXiv:2603.02029v1 [cs.AI] 2 Mar 2026 Rich Insights from Cheap Signals: Efficient Evaluations via Tensor Factorization

human annotations at this scale imposes high cognitive and financial costs, making it infeasible for many research and deployment scenarios where rapid iteration is required. One possibility is to rely on automated rating systems, or “autoraters” ( e.g. , LLM-as-a-Judge), which offer a scalable and cost-effective alternative to derive fine-grained insights. Yet, these systems are not perfect: developing autoraters that are accurate across diverse prompts, not merely on average, is expensive and difficult to scale, as it requires large amounts of high-quality human data for development. Moreover, the challenge is amplified in settings involving subjective human preferences, where systematic biases often hinder reliable alignment with human judgments out of the box (Dubois et al., 2024; Maia Polo et al., 2025; Park et al., 2024; Shi et al., 2024; Thakur et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2023; Ye et al., 2024; Zheng et al., 2023). The central challenge, therefore, is to reconcile the reliability of human evaluation with the scalability of automated systems for prompt-level assessment, without incurring the substantial costs of developing autoraters that are highly accurate at the prompt level. In this work, we move beyond coarse leaderboard metrics to enable fine-grained characterization of generative model performance for individual prompts and relatively homogeneous prompt subsets. To enable fine-grained characterization of model capabilities despite the scarcity of human labels, we propose a novel statistical model rooted in tensor factorization. Our methodology treats autorater scores as auxiliary signals to learn rich representations for both prompts and models, which are subsequently aligned with human preferences using a small calibration set; this approach lets us combine the strengths of individual autoraters to produce accurate performance estimates, even when each autorater is weak on its own. This process effectively transfers the scalability of autoraters to the downstream task of predicting human judgment. Empirically, we validate our approach on both text-to-image and text-generation benchmarks, including the vision-language dataset Gecko (Wiles et al., 2024) and the language model benchmarks BigGen Bench (Kim et al., 2025) and LMArena (Chiang et al., 2024). With as little as 10% of human annotations, our method recovers category-specific rankings and statistically significant prompt-level differences between models, and accurately predicts held-out models’ average scores and win-rate differences without observing any of their human labels. These results show that fine-grained, human-aligned evaluation can be performed reliably even under human annotation scarcity, enabling us to identify not only overall model quality but also the specific prompts and cohesive prompt categories where models excel or fall short. In summary, our contributions span both methodological and empirical dimensions: 

• Methodological Framework: We introduce a tensor factorization framework that unifies plentiful autorater data with sparse human labels to estimate models’ performances on individual prompts and a homogeneous subset of prompts. Our approach leverages low-rank structure to handle varying autorater reliability while deriving rigorous confidence intervals for these estimates. Our framework gives a statistically grounded foundation for trustworthy evaluation, i.e. , human-aligned and ensuring that uncertainty in model rankings is transparent and quantified. 

• Empirical Validation and Practical Applications: We demonstrate on both text-to-image (Wiles et al., 2024) and text-generation benchmarks (Chiang et al., 2024; Kim et al., 2025) that our approach substantially improves predictive accuracy by modeling latent model-prompt interactions and leveraging auxiliary autorater signals to align with human preferences, even when individual autoraters are weak or misaligned. Moving beyond coarse aggregate metrics, our framework practically enables fine-grained leaderboards at the level of individual prompts and cohesive prompt groups that clarify when performance differences are meaningful and reveal where models systematically excel or underperform. 

> 2Rich Insights from Cheap Signals: Efficient Evaluations via Tensor Factorization

## 2. Problem statement 

We address the problem of evaluating a set of generative models I = {0, . . . , 𝐼 − 1} over a large set of prompts J = {0, . . . , 𝐽 − 1} in the regime where gold standard, that is, human annotations are scarce, but autorater labels, potentially biased or noisy yet correlated with human judgments, are abundant. By leveraging these autoraters, our goal is to approximate the distribution of human annotations for any evaluation instance (𝑖, 𝑗 ). Here, 𝑖 denotes either a single model in I under single-sided, or pointwise, evaluation, or a pair of models in I under side-by-side, or pairwise, evaluation, and 𝑗 ∈ J 

denotes a prompt. In single-sided, or pointwise, evaluation, a rater, human or automated, assesses the output of one model in isolation, for example, by assigning a score on a fixed scale such as 0 to 10. In side by side, or pairwise, evaluation, the rater compares the outputs of two models and expresses a preference, such as “Model A is better than Model B” or “Tie.” Estimating this distribution enables us to diagnose fine-grained model strengths and weaknesses, construct model rankings at multiple levels of granularity, from individual prompts to clusters of related prompts, and estimate the performance of previously unseen generative models without requiring additional human supervision. 

## 3. Methodology 

In this section, we start by introducing the statistical foundations of our approach and then detail how it is used in practice. 

3.1. Statistical model Background. Let K = {0, . . . , 𝐾 − 1} denote the complete set of raters, where 𝑘 = 0 represents the gold-standard human rater and 𝑘 ∈ K \ { 0} represents cost-effective autoraters. Each rater 𝑘 ∈ K is defined by a specific backbone judge ( e.g. , human, Gemini 2.5 Flash-Lite) and an evaluation template specifying the assessment criteria and scale. We denote the evaluation outcome of rater 𝑘 for model(s) 

𝑖 on prompt 𝑗 as 𝑌 𝑖, 𝑗,𝑘 ∈ Y 𝑘 , where Y𝑘 = {0, . . . , 𝐶 𝑘 − 1} is a rater-specific finite set of ordered categories. The interpretation of 𝑌 𝑖, 𝑗,𝑘 depends on the template type: for single-sided evaluations, 𝑖 is a single model and 𝑌 𝑖, 𝑗,𝑘 represents a quality score; for side-by-side evaluations, 𝑖 = (𝑖 0, 𝑖 1) is a model pair and 

𝑌 𝑖, 𝑗,𝑘 indicates the degree of preference for 𝑖 1 over 𝑖 0, which can include ties. In practice, we observe a few labels for humans ( 𝑘 = 0), but many for autoraters ( 𝑘 > 0), and different raters can evaluate outputs using different templates. To unify human and autorater labels, thus effectively utilizing the auxiliary data, we draw on foundational concepts from Item Response Theory (IRT) (Cai et al., 2016) and Bradley-Terry (BT) models (Bradley and Terry, 1952), and we propose a statistical model centered on a tensor of capabilities .

Tensor of capabilities. We first introduce Ψ ∈ ℝ𝐼 ×𝐽 ×𝐾 , which we term the tensor of capabilities ,where the scalar entry Ψ𝑖, 𝑗,𝑘 quantifies the capability of model 𝑖 on prompt 𝑗 as perceived by rater 

𝑘 . We assume that the observed outcome 𝑌 𝑖, 𝑗,𝑘 is governed by a real scalar Δ𝑖, 𝑗,𝑘 , representing the effective advantage derived from these latent capabilities. The relationship between Δ and Ψ depends on the evaluation format: for a single-sided scoring template, the effective advantage corresponds directly to the model’s capability, such that Δ𝑖, 𝑗,𝑘 = Ψ𝑖, 𝑗,𝑘 . Conversely, if rater 𝑘 utilizes a side-by-side comparison template where 𝑖 denotes a pair (𝑖 0, 𝑖 1), we adopt the standard pairwise assumption that the outcome depends on the difference in capabilities: Δ𝑖, 𝑗,𝑘 = Ψ𝑖 1, 𝑗,𝑘 − Ψ𝑖 0, 𝑗,𝑘 .Crucially, we do not view the capability Ψ𝑖, 𝑗,𝑘 as a monolithic attribute. Instead, we operate under the assumption that a model’s performance on a specific problem instance is the composite outcome of low-dimensional fundamental abilities and rater criteria, making entries of Ψ interrelated. This 

> 3Rich Insights from Cheap Signals: Efficient Evaluations via Tensor Factorization

motivates a low-rank assumption for the resulting tensor Ψ. We posit that the interaction between models, prompts, and raters can be factorized into 𝑅 latent dimensions, interpreted here as specific “skills” or “factors”, such that: 

Ψ𝑖, 𝑗,𝑘 = Í𝑅 𝑟 =1 Θ𝑖,𝑟 𝐴 𝑗,𝑟 Γ𝑘,𝑟 .

This factorization is known as the CANDECOMP/PARAFAC (CP) tensor decomposition (Carroll and Chang, 1970; Harshman et al., 1970; Wang and Li, 2020). In the CP formulation, 𝑅 is relatively small, reflecting the finite set of skills required to characterize performance. The learnable factor matrices 

Θ ∈ ℝ𝐼 ×𝑅 , 𝐴 ∈ ℝ𝐽 ×𝑅 , and Γ ∈ ℝ𝐾 ×𝑅 serve as rich representations: Θ𝑖,𝑟 represents model 𝑖 ’s proficiency in skill 𝑟 ; 𝐴 𝑗,𝑟 represents the demand of prompt 𝑗 for skill 𝑟 ; and Γ𝑘,𝑟 captures the sensitivity or bias of rater 𝑘 toward skill 𝑟 . Since the interpretation of the factor matrices can be non-trivial, our primary focus remains on the tensor Ψ. The utility of this decomposition lies in the structural constraints it imposes: by implicitly linking entries within Ψ, the model facilitates the estimation of the human slice, Ψ𝑖, 𝑗, 0, with high data efficiency. In practice, the rank 𝑅 serves as a hyperparameter governing model expressiveness and is tuned using a validation set of human annotations. 

Distribution of 𝑌 𝑖, 𝑗,𝑘 . Due to the ordinal nature of 𝑌 𝑖, 𝑗,𝑘 , as previously introduced, we rely on the ordinal logistic (ordered logit) regression framework (Wooldridge, 2010). Let 𝜎 be the standard logistic function ( i.e. , sigmoid) and 𝛽 (𝑘 ) 

> 1

< · · · < 𝛽 (𝑘 )  

> 𝐶 𝑘 −1

be learnable ordered real cutoffs. Then, the probability of observing outcome 𝑦 ∈ { 0, . . . , 𝐶 𝑘 − 1} is assumed to be: 

PΛ (𝑌 𝑖, 𝑗,𝑘 = 𝑦 ) =



𝜎 



𝛽 (𝑘 ) 

> 1

− Δ𝑖, 𝑗,𝑘 



, if 𝑦 = 0,

1 − 𝜎 



𝛽 (𝑘 )  

> 𝐶 𝑘 −1

− Δ𝑖, 𝑗,𝑘 



, if 𝑦 = 𝐶 𝑘 − 1,𝜎 



𝛽 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑦 +1

− Δ𝑖, 𝑗,𝑘 



− 𝜎 



𝛽 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑦

− Δ𝑖, 𝑗,𝑘 



, otherwise. (3.1) where Λ denotes the whole set of parameters, i.e. , Λ ≜ (𝛽 (0) , · · · , 𝛽 (𝐾 −1) , Θ, 𝐴, Γ).For convenience, we define the set of human parameters ( 𝛽 (0) and the first row of Γ) as Λ(ℎ) ;the parameters that are in Λ but not in Λ(ℎ) are the autoraters, models, and prompt parameters and denoted as Λ(𝑎 ) , i.e. , Λ = (Λ(ℎ) , Λ(𝑎 ) ). This formulation is related to models routinely used in the literature. For example, when 𝐽 = 𝐾 = 𝐶 𝑘 − 1 = 1 and we carry out side-by-side evaluations, we recover the BT model (Bradley and Terry, 1952). When 𝐾 = 1 and evaluations are single-sided, we recover an instance of the Graded Response Model (GRM) from the IRT literature (Reckase, 2009; Samejima, 2016). 

3.2. Model fitting 

We assume access to a dataset D = ∪𝑁 𝑛 =1{𝐷 𝑛 }, where each 𝐷 𝑛 ≜ (𝑖 (𝑛 ) , 𝑗 (𝑛 ) , 𝑘 (𝑛 ) , 𝑌 (𝑛 ) ) is a tuple containing the model(s) 𝑖 (𝑛 ) , prompt 𝑗 (𝑛 ) , rater 𝑘 (𝑛 ) , and the observed label 𝑌 (𝑛 ) ≜ 𝑌 𝑖 (𝑛 ) , 𝑗 (𝑛 ) ,𝑘 (𝑛 ) . We partition this dataset into human-rated samples, D (ℎ) ≜ ∪𝑛 :𝑘 (𝑛 ) =0{𝐷 𝑛 }, and autorater samples, D (𝑎 ) ≜

∪𝑛 :𝑘 (𝑛 ) >0{𝐷 𝑛 }. For convenience, we learn the model parameters Λ using both D (ℎ) and D (𝑎 ) using a two-stage maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) procedure. The negative log-likelihood (NLL) for a single data point 𝐷 𝑛 under parameters Λ is defined as: 

L( Λ, 𝐷 𝑛 ) ≜ − Í𝐶 𝑘 (𝑛 ) −1 

> 𝑦 =0

1[𝑌 (𝑛 ) = 𝑦 ] log PΛ (𝑌 𝑖 (𝑛 ) , 𝑗 (𝑛 ) ,𝑘 (𝑛 ) = 𝑦 ).

In the first stage, we estimate the autorater parameters Λ(𝑎 ) , including the model embeddings, prompt embeddings, and autorater parameters, by minimizing the NLL over D (𝑎 ) :

bΛ(𝑎 ) ∈ arg min Λ(𝑎 )

Í𝐷 𝑛 ∈ D (𝑎 ) L( Λ, 𝐷 𝑛 ).

> 4Rich Insights from Cheap Signals: Efficient Evaluations via Tensor Factorization

In the second stage, we freeze the estimates bΛ(𝑎 ) and fit the human-specific parameters Λ(ℎ) (the human rater embedding and cutoffs) by minimizing the NLL on the human-rated dataset D (ℎ) :

bΛ(ℎ) = arg min Λ(ℎ)

Í𝐷 𝑛 ∈ D (ℎ) L  (Λ(ℎ) , bΛ(𝑎 ) ), 𝐷 𝑛 

.

In practice, we perform the first stage optimization using the Adam optimizer (Kingma, 2014) (Algorithm 1). We run this stage with multiple random initializations and learning rates, selecting the configuration that yields the lowest training loss. Subsequently, the second stage is conducted using the BFGS algorithm (Nocedal and Wright, 2006). An important observation is that the estimator bΛ(𝑎 ) is not unique 2 because the parameterization of Λ(𝑎 ) is not identifiable. However, conditioned on a fixed bΛ(𝑎 ) , the estimator bΛ(ℎ) is typically unique, as the optimization reduces to standard maximum likelihood estimation for ordinal logistic regression. While identifiability can be achieved by constraining 3 the parameter space during the first stage, enforcing it offers no practical benefit, as we are interested in the predictive performance of the capability tensor rather than in the interpretation of the specific latent factors. Pragmatically, we interpret the first stage as a representation learning phase, and the second stage as fitting a conventional ordinal regression model on top of those learned representations. 

Connections to transfer learning. The first fitting stage is analogous to pretraining, where we learn robust representations for models ( Θ) and prompts ( 𝐴 ) by exploiting the large volume of autorater data. In the second stage, we transfer these rich features to the downstream task of predicting human labels. By freezing the latent factors, we reduce the optimization problem to learning a simple linear alignment, defined by the human rater embedding Γ0,· and cutoffs 𝛽 (0) , on top of the pretrained representations. This effectively treats the scarce human data as a supervision signal for calibrating the shared latent space, dramatically reducing sample complexity compared to training from scratch. 

Fine-tuning. In some cases, an optional third stage can be beneficial for improving empirical accuracy, e.g. , when representations Θ and 𝐴 are not well calibrated to human data. Starting from the combined estimates bΛ = (bΛ(ℎ) , bΛ(𝑎 ) ), we further fine-tune all parameters Λ by performing gradient descent on the human-rated data objective, Í𝐷 𝑛 ∈ D (ℎ) L( Λ, 𝐷 𝑛 ). To prevent overfitting, we use a small learning rate and hold out a part of D (ℎ) as a validation set to apply early stopping. We perform this step using a variant of Algorithm 1: starting from the parameter estimates obtained in earlier stages, we fine-tune the model on the human-labeled data by updating all weights, with early stopping to limit overfitting. In practice, this refinement rarely harms predictive performance, but it invalidates the standard confidence intervals derived in the coming paragraphs. Gains are typically larger when at least a few human labels per prompt are available 4, enabling meaningful updates to prompt representations. Accordingly, we recommend fine-tuning when human annotations cover a non-negligible fraction of prompts and point prediction accuracy is the primary objective, and we discourage it when prompt-level human data are extremely sparse or when valid, easily interpretable uncertainty quantification is required for downstream inference. 

3.3. Fine-grained AI evaluation 

In this subsection, we demonstrate how the fitted model enables leaderboard construction based on a single prompt or a homogenous subset of prompts. We proceed under the working assumption 

> 2Therefore, we use “ ∈” instead of “ =”.
> 3Please check Appendix C for a concrete set of constraints.
> 4See the case of Gecko in Figure 1.
> 5Rich Insights from Cheap Signals: Efficient Evaluations via Tensor Factorization

that all model parameters are estimated with high precision, excluding only those associated with human raters. The initial fitting stage incorporates a sufficient volume of autorater labels to allow us to treat these parameters as fixed quantities 5. We therefore neglect error propagation from the first fitting stage when deriving confidence intervals. This is a mild assumption because autoraters can be queried at scale to make the resulting estimation error negligible. Conceptually, we view the first fitting stage as representation learning and the second stage as an inference and uncertainty quantification phase. 

Prompt-specific evaluation. We describe how to estimate model capabilities with uncertainty quantification for prompt-specific leaderboards. Denote by 𝛾 𝑘 the transpose of the 𝑘 -th row of Γ (rater representations) and by 𝑣 𝑖, 𝑗 the transpose of the element-wise product of the 𝑖 -th row of Θ (model representations) and the 𝑗 -th row of 𝐴 (prompt representations). Now, to rank models according to a prompt 𝑗 and the human rater ( 𝑘 = 0), we use an estimate for the capability scalar Ψ𝑖, 𝑗, 0 = 𝑣 ⊤

> 𝑖, 𝑗

𝛾 0,swapping 𝛾 0 for ˆ𝛾 0 (obtaining ˆΨ𝑖, 𝑗, 0), where ˆ𝛾 0 is obtained in the second stage of the fitting algorithm, using 𝑚 ≜ |D (ℎ) | human annotations. We derive the asymptotic confidence interval for Ψ𝑖, 𝑗, 0 as CI 𝜌 = ˆΨ𝑖, 𝑗, 0 ± Φ−1

 1+𝜌 

> 2

√︂ 𝑣 ⊤ 

> 𝑖, 𝑗 ˆΣ𝑣 𝑖, 𝑗
> 𝑚

where ˆΣ is a matrix computed from the data, 𝜌 ∈ ( 0, 1) is the target confidence level and Φ−1

the standard Gaussian 6 quantile function. In practice, when constructing leaderboards, we desire these confidence intervals to have simultaneous approximate coverage across all indices (𝑖, 𝑗 ). This ensures that the implied ranking of models is statistically valid as a whole, guarding against the high probability of making at least one ordering error that arises when performing multiple comparisons simultaneously. To achieve this, the interval CI 𝜌 must be made more conservative; in practice, we always opt for this approach. See Appendix A for a detailed description of confidence intervals. 

Category-specific evaluation. To better understand model proficiency in specific skills, it is often more insightful to aggregate capability across a subset of related prompts, denoted by J , rather than relying on individual rankings. Since individual prompts often capture secondary, unrelated skills alongside the target capability, aggregating allows us to isolate the dominant common skill. To achieve this, we leverage the concept of the reference composite (Reckase, 2009). Let 𝛼 𝑗 denote the transpose of the 𝑗 -th row of 𝐴 . The reference composite for the set {𝛼 𝑗 } 𝑗 ∈ J is defined as the unit vector 𝛼 J that best summarizes the prompts in J by solving the following optimization problem: 

𝛼 J = arg min 𝑢 :∥𝑢 ∥=1

Í𝑗 ∈ J 𝛼 𝑗 − ( 𝑢 ⊤𝛼 𝑗 )𝑢 2 .

In words, 𝛼 J represents the direction of the line that best approximates the set {𝛼 𝑗 } 𝑗 ∈ J . By minimizing the orthogonal projection errors, 𝛼 J aligns with the principal direction of the category, effectively averaging out the noise introduced by secondary skills. Operationally, 𝛼 J corresponds to the leading eigenvector of the matrix Í𝑗 ∈ J 𝛼 𝑗 𝛼 ⊤ 

> 𝑗

. This observation allows us to quantify how well the reference composite captures the information in J by calculating the ratio of the first eigenvalue to the sum of all eigenvalues; this metric provides a notion of cohesion , indicating the extent to which the set J is driven by a single dominant skill. We define 𝑣 𝑖, J as the entry-wise product of the (transposed) 𝑖 -th row of Θ and 𝛼 J , while the construction of Ψ𝑖, J,0 (or ˆΨ𝑖, J,0) proceeds as before by substituting 𝑣 𝑖, 𝑗 

with 𝑣 𝑖, J .

> 5Up to (identifiability) equivalences described in Appendix C.
> 6The use of Gaussian quantiles is motivated on Appendix A.
> 6Rich Insights from Cheap Signals: Efficient Evaluations via Tensor Factorization

Comparing two generative models. In certain scenarios, e.g. , when assessing the relative strengths of one model versus another, it is more informative to directly compare two models of interest, 

𝑖 = (𝑖 0, 𝑖 1), rather than constructing a leaderboard containing all models. In this context, our attention shifts to the quantity: 

Δ𝑖, 𝑗, 0 = Ψ𝑖 1, 𝑗, 0 − Ψ𝑖 0, 𝑗, 0 = (𝑣 𝑖 1, 𝑗 − 𝑣 𝑖 0, 𝑗 )⊤𝛾 0.

Analogous to Ψ𝑖, 𝑗, 0, the estimator ˆΔ𝑖, 𝑗, 0 is obtained by substituting 𝛾 0 with ˆ𝛾 0. Similarly, confidence intervals are derived by replacing the estimate ˆΨ𝑖, 𝑗, 0 with ˆΔ𝑖, 𝑗, 0 and the vector 𝑣 𝑖, 𝑗 with the difference vector 𝑣 𝑖 1, 𝑗 − 𝑣 𝑖 0, 𝑗 .

Comparing results across prompts 𝑗 . A critical observation is that when using side-by-side tem-plates for human annotation, only the differences Ψ𝑖 1, 𝑗, 0 − Ψ𝑖 0, 𝑗, 0 are identifiable (see Appendix C). Consequently, the values of Ψ𝑖, 𝑗, 0 are not comparable across different values of 𝑗 . In contrast, such comparisons are entirely valid when the human evaluation template is single-sided. Moreover, when different sets J are considered, it is hard to compare results across groups of prompts (in all cases) since 𝛼 J are all normalized. 

## 4. Experiments 

In this section, we apply our method to real-world data. Specifically, we: (i) compare the predictive power of our approach against baselines; (ii) demonstrate that insightful category-specific rankings can be derived using only a fraction of human annotations; (iii) analyze the relative strengths and weaknesses of paired models across each benchmark; (iv) predict the performance of models that received no human annotations; and (v) provide an example of how prompt representations can be leveraged to extract useful insights about the benchmarks. For all experiments and benchmarks, we set 𝑅 = 10 as this number produces reasonable performance across benchmarks (Figure 10). 

4.1. Data 

We test our methodology on the following three established benchmarks for generative models: the first focuses on image generation, while the latter two target the text modality. For all benchmarks, we utilize the model generations and human annotations provided by their authors. 

• Gecko2K (Gecko) (Wiles et al., 2024) is a comprehensive evaluation suite for text-to-image (T2I) alignment. We utilize the Gecko(S) subset, which comprises approximately 1,000 prompts selected via a hierarchical, semi-automatic method to ensure diverse coverage of fine-grained skills. The diagnostic design of Gecko(S) provides a controlled and objective measure of model performance against specific generation challenges. We rely on the provided side-by-side human annotations, utilizing approximately 18k pairwise human annotations involving four different T2I models. 

• BigGen Bench (BGB) (Kim et al., 2025) evaluates language model outputs based on detailed rubrics across five satisfaction levels. We map the original 1–5 scale to a 0–4 range and focus on the subset containing English-language human annotations. This results in 695 instances across 77 tasks and nine evaluated capabilities ( e.g. , planning, tool usage). Each instance includes responses from four different models, totaling 2,780 human-annotated data points after excluding a small number of invalid entries. 

• LMArena: We use a dataset 7 derived from LMArena (also known as Chatbot Arena) (Chiang et al., 2024). The original dataset consists of 140k queries with side-by-side responses from anonymous models. User preferences are annotated as either a clear choice or a tie (labeled as “good” or “bad” 

> 7Retrieved from https://huggingface.co/datasets/lmarena-ai/arena-human-preference-140k.
> 7Rich Insights from Cheap Signals: Efficient Evaluations via Tensor Factorization

Figure 1 | Test cross-entropy loss comparison between our proposed method (default and fine-tuned) and baseline approaches (Constant, Prompt-specific, and P2L) across three benchmarks: Gecko (left), BigGen Bench (center), and LMArena (right). Our methods consistently achieve lower losses for different human annotation budgets, demonstrating the benefits of prompt-specific modeling and auxiliary autorater data. 

ties); we treat both tie types equivalently. The dataset we use is obtained by filtering matches with one round where both competing models are among ten pre-specified state-of-the-art LLMs 8,resulting in nearly 5k human-annotated matches. 

Autorater labels. We adopted different strategies for collecting autorater labels across these three benchmarks. For BGB, we aggregated pre-existing ratings provided by Kim et al. (2025) for five models 9 and by Maia Polo et al. (2025) for seven models 10 , including distinct variations; for each one of the open models, the authors applied two distinct prompting strategies. This resulted in a total of 15 autoraters for BGB. For both Gecko and LMArena, we developed custom autoraters based on Gemini 2.5 Flash-Lite 11 (Comanici et al., 2025). To induce diverse evaluative behaviors, we varied both the evaluation template (single-sided vs. side-by-side) and the specific persona or criteria used. For autoraters using the single-sided template, we employed a two-step process: the model first generates a checklist of important factors required in the generation for each prompt, and second, it evaluates each item on the checklist as present (1) or absent (0); we use the same checklists for different generations for a given prompt. We calculate the proportion of present factors and bin this fraction into 10 ordered categories. We employed 8 autoraters for Gecko and 24 for LMArena, with an even split between template types. We set the autorater temperature to 1, sampled 8 ratings per input, and utilized all replicas when fitting the statistical model. In Appendix E, we provide examples of the prompts used and describe the associated personas. 

4.2. Predictive power 

In this subsection, we assess the goodness of fit of our method relative to baseline approaches. These results serve primarily as a sanity check, demonstrating that for different human annotation budgets: (i) prompt-specific modeling is essential; and (ii) auxiliary autorater data is highly beneficial for             

> 8The chosen models are: claude-3-5-haiku-20241022, claude-3-5-sonnet-20241022, gpt-4o-mini-2024-07-18, llama-3.3-70b-instruct, amazon.nova-pro-v1:0, gemini-2.5-flash-lite-preview-06-17-thinking, gemini-2.5-pro, gpt-4.1-2025-04-14, claude-opus-4-20250514, and claude-sonnet-4-20250514.
> 9The columns in their data are given by the names: claude_score, gpt4_04_turbo_score, gpt4_score, prometheus_8x7b_score, prometheus_8x7b_bgb_score.
> 10 Model names are: atlaAI/Selene-1-Mini-Llama-3.1-8B, meta-llama/Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct, gpt-4-turbo, gpt-4.1-nano, gpt-4.1, gpt-4o-mini-2024-07-18, prometheus-eval/prometheus-8x7b-v2.0.
> 11 We rely on a lightweight model to enable faster iteration and large-scale annotation collection, reaching hundreds of thousands of scores. While upgrading to more capable models would likely improve baseline performance, it would also enhance the performance of our method, since it depends directly on autorater labels. In summary, expect our empirical findings to extend to stronger models, as our experiments already include GPT-4.1 in the BGB setting.
> 8Rich Insights from Cheap Signals: Efficient Evaluations via Tensor Factorization

Figure 2 | Category cohesion rankings for Gecko (left) and BigGen Bench (right). Categories are ordered from most to least cohesive based on the metric described in §3.3. 

fitting our statistical model when human annotations are scarce. The first baseline method, denoted as “Constant”, represents a simplification of our approach where: (i) the rank is set to 𝑅 = 1; (ii) all entries of 𝐴 are fixed to the same constant; and (iii)  

> Γ

consists of a single row representing the human rater. Without loss of generality, the entries of  

> 𝐴

and Γ are fixed to 1. Consequently, the “Constant” baseline disregards prompt heterogeneity and ignores auxiliary data from autoraters. Note that for side-by-side evaluations (where 𝐶 0 = 2), this baseline reduces to the classic Bradley-Terry model (Bradley and Terry, 1952). The second baseline, “Prompt-specific”, is a variant of our main method that excludes auxiliary data but allows for prompt heterogeneity; this approach can be seen as a variation of the Item Response Theory model (Reckase, 2009). Here, we let 𝑅 > 1 and assign each prompt a distinct, trainable representation in 𝐴 , while Γ remains restricted to a single row fixed to a vector of ones. The final baseline is the Prompt-to-Leaderboard (P2L) method (Frick et al., 2025), applied only to LMArena. In short, P2L parameterizes 𝐴 using embeddings extracted from a language model fine-tuned to predict the demands of generic task descriptions. Said that, we initialize 𝐴 using embeddings from the pretrained model lmarena-ai/p2l-3b-rk-01132025 and train the remaining model parameters from scratch using human annotations (except for Γ, which is again fixed since no autoraters are considered). Figure 1 illustrates the test cross-entropy loss for both the default and fine-tuned versions of our approach compared to all baselines. For each budget, we randomly allocate a portion of human annotations for training and the remainder for testing. This process is repeated 30 times for each benchmark, and we report the average results ± one standard deviation. For the “Prompt-specific” baseline, we sweep over a wide range of ranks 𝑅 and ℓ2 regularization strengths, whereas for P2L we vary the ℓ2 regularization strength and learning rates. Overall, our methods outperform the baselines across all benchmarks. Notably, both our fine-tuned model and the “Prompt-specific” baseline perform well on Gecko given sufficient human labels. We attribute this to the multiple annotations available per prompt in Gecko, which allow for better fitting of prompt representations compared to the sparse annotations found in other benchmarks. 

4.3. Category-Specific Rankings 

In this subsection, we focus on Gecko and BGB, as these benchmarks provide a pre-specified set of fine-grained prompt categories. We first report the cohesion of these categories, as measured by the metric described in §3.3. Figure 2 shows the ranking of categories from each benchmark from most to least co-hesive. From the most cohesive categories, we estimated the human score, Ψ𝑖, J,0, for two categories per benchmark. 

> 9Rich Insights from Cheap Signals: Efficient Evaluations via Tensor Factorization

Figure 3 | Model rankings with 95% simultaneous con-fidence intervals for two Gecko categories: “Lang/Com-positional” (left) and “Additive” (right), estimated using only 10% of human annotations. The plots reveal perfor-mance discrepancies across different skills; for instance, Imagen matches SDXL in compositional tasks but un-derperforms in additive tasks. 

We used only 10% of the total human anno-tations and the more conservative confidence intervals introduced in Appendix A with approx-imate 95% simultaneous coverage across mod-els and leaderboards. As shown in Figures 3 and 4, using only 10% of the annotations 12 

across all prompts suffices to reliably distin-guish model performance across individual cat-egories. We further see that models may excel or underperform depending on the target cat-egory. For instance, Imagen ties with SDXL on the “Lang/Compositional” category but is signif-icantly worse at generating for prompts in the “Additive” category. In the appendix, Figures 13 and 14 expand the results of this section for all top cohesive categories in Figure 2. Moreover, Figures 15 and 16 demonstrate that increasing the sample size improves our ability to distinguish between models, particularly when performance differ-ences are marginal. In practice, researchers can continue data collection until the confidence intervals are sufficiently narrow. Finally, it is important to note that a smaller rank 𝑅 yields narrower intervals by reducing the variance of ˆ𝛾 0; consequently, one must balance predictive performance with different uncertainty levels. 

4.4. Exploring strengths and weaknesses of different models 

Figure 4 | Model rankings with 95% simultaneous confi-dence intervals for two BigGen Bench tasks: “Multi-step” (left) and “Interplanetary Diplomacy” (right), estimated using a 10% sample of human annotations. 

For each benchmark, we compare the capa-bilities of two models across all prompts us-ing the methodology introduced in §3.3. For both Gecko and BGB, we plot the estimates for Ψ𝑖 1, 𝑗, 0 − Ψ𝑖 0, 𝑗, 0 (along with 95% confidence intervals with simultaneous coverage over all prompts), coloring them using a coarser set of categories for improved interpretability. Figure 5 displays the results using only 10% of the avail-able human annotations. In the Gecko panel, we observe that many of the prompts where Im-agen holds a significant advantage over Muse are related to text rendering; conversely, we see a few such prompts where Muse holds a big ad-vantage. Additionally, a substantial portion of the prompts where Muse outperforms Imagen involves object counting, a finding consistent with the conclusions drawn from Figure 3. Re-garding BGB, we observe that the set of prompts where LLaMa-2-13b holds any advantage over      

> 12 This is equivalent to <2(resp. <1/2) human labels per prompt on Gecko (resp. BGB), on average.
> 10 Rich Insights from Cheap Signals: Efficient Evaluations via Tensor Factorization

Figure 5 | Fine-grained comparison of model capabilities using 10% of human annotations. Top: Difference in estimated scores between Imagen and Muse on Gecko prompts, colored by category. Imagen excels in text rendering, while Muse shows advantages in object counting. Bottom: Difference between LLaMa-2-13b and GPT-3.5-Turbo on BigGen Bench prompts. GPT-3.5-Turbo demonstrates a significant advantage in reasoning-related prompts. 

Figure 6 | In LMArena, we estimate that LLaMa-3.3-70b is capable of beating Gemini-2.5-Pro in ≈ 8% and tying other ≈ 24% of the times. 

GPT-3.5-Turbo is very limited; however, their performance matches for many instruction-following and safety prompts. Moreover, among the prompts where GPT-3.5-Turbo has a significant advantage over LLaMa-2-13b, a large proportion relates to reasoning capabilities. Figure 17 conveys a similar message but utilizes a larger set of human annotations, thereby decreasing uncertainty and reducing the length of the confidence intervals. Separately, we show the results for LMArena in Figure 6 using the full set of human annotations (one per prompt). In this plot, we compare LLaMa-3.3-70b-it with the state-of-the-art model Gemini-2.5-Pro. For this set of results, we verified that LLaMa is statistically better than Gemini in ≈ 8% of the prompts 13 and ties with the stronger model in ≈ 24% of the time 14 . This fact shows that, in 

≈ 32% of the cases, Gemini could be substituted by LLaMa-3.3-70b-it with no loss in performance. In this case, most of the prompts were never used to evaluate the two chosen models. In the appendix, Table 3 tries to explain the gaps in performance between the two models as a function of different tags provided in the LMArena dataset. 

> 13 Confidence interval lower bound is greater than zero.
> 14 Confidence interval includes zero.
> 11 Rich Insights from Cheap Signals: Efficient Evaluations via Tensor Factorization

Figure 7 | Validation of predictive power on held-out models. The plots compare the ground truth average scores (or win-rate differences) against the values predicted by our method for a model whose human annotations were entirely withheld during training. Results are shown for Gecko (left), BigGen Bench (center), and LMArena (right), indicating strong correlation and preservation of pairwise rankings. 

4.5. Average Score and Win-rate Prediction 

In this subsection, we demonstrate the predictive power of our methodology by estimating the performance of a generative model without observing any of its human annotations. Specifically, we aim to approximate one of two metrics for a held-out model 𝑖 : either the average score (for single-sided evaluations), defined as Average score = 1

> 𝐽

Í𝐽 𝑗 =1 𝑌 𝑖, 𝑗, 0, or the win rate difference (for side-by-side evaluations) against all other models, defined as Win rate difference = 1

> 𝐽

Í𝐽 𝑗 =1 1[𝑌 𝑖, 𝑗, 0 =

2] − 1[𝑌 𝑖, 𝑗, 0 = 0], where 𝑌 𝑖, 𝑗, 0 = 2 denotes a victory for the held-out model and 𝑌 𝑖, 𝑗, 0 = 0 denotes a victory for the opponent. To approximate these metrics, we replace the observed outcomes with the expected values predicted by our method. Figure 7 presents the results of this leave-one-out experiment, plotting the ground truth (x-axis) against our predicted values (y-axis) as we iterate through each generative model. We observe that, across all benchmarks, our methodology yields precise estimates of ground truth performance without training on any human annotations for the held-out model. Notably, for Gecko and LMArena, the majority of data points cluster in the first and third quadrants; this indicates that the sign of the performance metric is correctly predicted, thereby preserving the pairwise ordering of generative models. Standard errors are plotted both in the horizontal and in the vertical directions. 

4.6. Other interpretable insights 

Figure 8 | Conditional distributions of prompt length for SD1.5 on the Gecko benchmark, comparing densities when it achieves its best versus worst rank. The shift shows SD1.5 performs relatively better on shorter prompts. 

In this subsection, we present an addi-tional example of the interpretable insights achievable with our approach. While this result is specific to Gecko, similar analy-ses can be derived for other benchmarks. We characterize the properties of prompts where SD1.5 performs relatively well ver-sus poorly. Figure 8 compares the con-ditional distributions of prompt length, a proxy for prompt complexity in Gecko, given that SD1.5 achieves the best versus the worst rank; in this case, we use the full data to estimate parameters with the fine-tuning approach for more accurate re-sults. The data reveals a clear trend: SD1.5 performs relatively better on less complex (shorter) prompts. 

> 12 Rich Insights from Cheap Signals: Efficient Evaluations via Tensor Factorization

## 5. Related Work 

Autoraters. Autoraters are automated rating systems that process a task description and the outputs produced by generative models to produce scores, rankings, etc. . With the recent emergence of large language models (LLMs) and multimodal LLMs (MLLMs), which are typically capable of few-shot learning, autoraters have become primarily associated with the LLM-as-a-Judge paradigm and its variations (Chen et al., 2024; Gu et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024a,b). However, these systems often exhibit inherent biases (Dubois et al., 2024; Maia Polo et al., 2025; Park et al., 2024; Shi et al., 2024; Thakur et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2023; Ye et al., 2024; Zheng et al., 2023) and do not align with human raters out of the box, typically requiring prompt refinement, in-context examples, fine-tuning, or post-hoc correction. As is the case with human evaluators, the evaluation procedure is usually conducted using single-sided or side-by-side evaluation templates. In our work, we acknowledge the limitations of autoraters and employ LLM/MLLMs not as the final rating systems, but to generate auxiliary data that aids in extracting useful representations for prompts and generative models. 

Statistical and Prompt-specific AI Evaluation. Statistical models are becoming increasingly relevant to the field of AI evaluation, as they provide more data-efficient and insightful evaluations. Perhaps the most well-known framework is the Bradley-Terry (BT) model and its variations (Bohnet et al., 2024; Bradley and Terry, 1952; Frick et al., 2025; Rao and Kupper, 1967; Yuan and Hu, 2025), particularly following its adoption by the online leaderboard LMArena (Chiang et al., 2024). The traditional Bradley-Terry model ranks models based on pairwise comparisons by assuming performance is driven by a single scalar skill parameter; however, a key limitation is that match outcomes are assumed to be independent of the input prompts given to the models. Another popular class of statistical models used in evaluation includes factor models, such as classical Gaussian Factor Analysis (FA) (Burnell et al., 2023; Lawley and Maxwell, 1962) and Item Response Theory (IRT) models (Cai et al., 2016; Maia Polo et al., 2024a; Rodriguez et al., 2021; Yuan and Hu, 2025; Zhou et al., 2025). Both FA and IRT models offer unidimensional and multidimensional variants for occasions in which one or more skills are assumed to drive model performance on benchmarks. In the case of multidimensional skills, a unique global ranking of models does not exist, and performance is prompt-dependent, i.e. , models will hold advantages across different sets of prompts. It is crucial to note that the classical FA/IRT approach treats a subset of parameters as random ( i.e. , random effects), integrating them out of the likelihood function to ensure consistent estimation of the remaining parameters. However, this framework limits our ability to consistently estimate the random effects themselves, a necessary step for achieving our goal of prompt-specific performance. Consequently, we adopt an approach in which all parameters are treated as fixed (Chen et al., 2019). Recently, Frick et al. (2025) proposed the Prompt-to-Leaderboard (P2L) framework, which can build accurate leaderboards that are prompt-specific. Our work also tackles this direction, but we leverage autoraters and avoid relying on fine-tuning a language model, which makes the application feasible in situations where human annotations are not abundant. 

Efficient evaluation. AI evaluation can be costly and time-consuming, either because the generative inference step is expensive or because the evaluation step is costly, especially when human annotators are employed. Different strategies can be applied to reduce evaluation costs, and we categorize them into three main approaches. In the first category, the strategy is to first reduce the number of prompts used for inference, evaluate the model on this subset, and subsequently predict the performance on the full set of prompts (Maia Polo et al., 2024a,b; Perlitz et al., 2024; Vivek et al., 2024; Zhang 

> 13 Rich Insights from Cheap Signals: Efficient Evaluations via Tensor Factorization

et al., 2025). In the second category, active or adaptive testing is used to sequentially choose which data points should be utilized during the evaluation process (Angelopoulos et al., 2025; Berrada et al., 2025; Kossen et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2024). In the third category, label proxies are employed to reduce the variance of performance estimates (Boyeau et al., 2024). Our approach to efficient evaluation aligns better with the third category in the sense that we use auxiliary data to reduce the variance of our estimates. 

## 6. Conclusion 

The transition to fine-grained evaluation is essential for characterizing modern generative models, but is significantly bottlenecked by the high cost of human annotation. To address this, we presented a statistical framework rooted in tensor factorization that treats cost-effective autorater scores as auxiliary signals to learn shared latent representations of prompts and models. This approach effectively bridges the gap between scalable automated systems and high-quality human judgment, allowing for robust estimation of model capabilities even in data-scarce regimes where standard metrics often fail. Empirically, our method significantly outperforms baselines like Bradley-Terry and IRT by capturing complex model-prompt interactions while using auxiliary data to solve cold-start issues. We demonstrated practical utility by constructing granular leaderboards that reveal trade-offs hidden by aggregate metrics, such as identifying that models tied on my prompts or sub-tasks can excel or fail on other instances, and by accurately predicting the performance of unseen models without requiring new human labels 

Limitations. First, our approach depends on modeling assumptions that may fail: a low-rank capability tensor and an ordinal logit model with rater-specific cutoffs. Second, with side-by-side human templates, only relative capabilities are identifiable, limiting cross-prompt comparability. Third, auxiliary autorater data help only when they correlate with human preferences to some degree and are sufficiently diverse; shared autorater biases or a very small human calibration set can affect performance. Finally, our uncertainty estimates use approximations and do not fully propagate first-stage error, so they can be optimistic when autorater data are limited, and standard intervals do not directly apply after optional human fine-tuning. 

Future directions. While this work establishes a foundation for granular evaluation, several research avenues remain. Integrating active learning could optimize calibration by adaptively selecting model-prompt pairs for human labeling. Additionally, the estimated latent capabilities could serve as dense, human-aligned reward signals for reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF). Finally, it is possible extend this framework to complex modalities like video and code, and to the evaluation of autonomous agents. This would involve capturing the multi-turn dynamics and environmental interactions inherent in agentic workflows, moving beyond static prompt-response pairs. 

## 7. Acknowledgements 

During the development of this project, we had several helpful discussions with Ashkan Khakzar, Pinelopi Papalampidi, Hannah Rashkin, Aleksandar Stanić, Reinald Kim Amplayo, and Junwei Huang. We are grateful for their contribution. 

> 14 Rich Insights from Cheap Signals: Efficient Evaluations via Tensor Factorization

## References 

A. N. Angelopoulos, J. Eisenstein, J. Berant, A. Agarwal, and A. Fisch. Cost-optimal active ai model evaluation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.07949 , 2025. G. Berrada, J. Kossen, M. Razzak, F. B. Smith, Y. Gal, and T. Rainforth. Scaling up active testing to large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.09093 , 2025. B. Bohnet, K. Swersky, R. Liu, P. Awasthi, A. Nova, J. Snaider, H. Sedghi, A. T. Parisi, M. Collins, A. Lazaridou, et al. Long-span question-answering: Automatic question generation and qa-system ranking via side-by-side evaluation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.00179 , 2024. P. Boyeau, A. N. Angelopoulos, N. Yosef, J. Malik, and M. I. Jordan. Autoeval done right: Using synthetic data for model evaluation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.07008 , 2024. R. A. Bradley and M. E. Terry. Rank analysis of incomplete block designs: I. the method of paired comparisons. Biometrika , 39(3/4):324–345, 1952. R. Burnell, H. Hao, A. R. Conway, and J. H. Orallo. Revealing the structure of language model capabilities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.10062 , 2023. L. Cai, K. Choi, M. Hansen, and L. Harrell. Item response theory. Annual Review of Statistics and Its Application , 3(1):297–321, 2016. J. D. Carroll and J.-J. Chang. Analysis of individual differences in multidimensional scaling via an n-way generalization of “eckart-young” decomposition. Psychometrika , 35(3):283–319, 1970. D. Chen, R. Chen, S. Zhang, Y. Wang, Y. Liu, H. Zhou, Q. Zhang, Y. Wan, P. Zhou, and L. Sun. Mllm-as-a-judge: Assessing multimodal llm-as-a-judge with vision-language benchmark. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning , 2024. Y. Chen, X. Li, and S. Zhang. Joint maximum likelihood estimation for high-dimensional exploratory item factor analysis. Psychometrika , 84(1):124–146, 2019. W.-L. Chiang, L. Zheng, Y. Sheng, A. N. Angelopoulos, T. Li, D. Li, B. Zhu, H. Zhang, M. Jordan, J. E. Gonzalez, et al. Chatbot arena: An open platform for evaluating llms by human preference. In 

Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning , 2024. G. Comanici, E. Bieber, M. Schaekermann, I. Pasupat, N. Sachdeva, I. Dhillon, M. Blistein, O. Ram, D. Zhang, E. Rosen, et al. Gemini 2.5: Pushing the frontier with advanced reasoning, multimodality, long context, and next generation agentic capabilities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.06261 , 2025. Y. Dubois, B. Galambosi, P. Liang, and T. B. Hashimoto. Length-controlled alpacaeval: A simple way to debias automatic evaluators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.04475 , 2024. E. Frick, C. Chen, J. Tennyson, T. Li, W.-L. Chiang, A. N. Angelopoulos, and I. Stoica. Prompt-to-leaderboard. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.14855 , 2025. J. Gu, X. Jiang, Z. Shi, H. Tan, X. Zhai, C. Xu, W. Li, Y. Shen, S. Ma, H. Liu, et al. A survey on llm-as-a-judge. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.15594 , 2024. R. A. Harshman et al. Foundations of the parafac procedure: Models and conditions for an “explana-tory” multi-modal factor analysis. UCLA working papers in phonetics , 16(1):84, 1970. T. Hothorn, F. Bretz, and P. Westfall. Simultaneous inference in general parametric models. Biometrical Journal: Journal of Mathematical Methods in Biosciences , 50(3):346–363, 2008. 

> 15 Rich Insights from Cheap Signals: Efficient Evaluations via Tensor Factorization

S. Kim, J. Suk, J. Y. Cho, S. Longpre, C. Kim, D. Yoon, G. Son, Y. Cho, S. Shafayat, J. Baek, et al. The biggen bench: A principled benchmark for fine-grained evaluation of language models with language models. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pages 5877–5919, 2025. D. P. Kingma. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980 , 2014. J. Kossen, S. Farquhar, Y. Gal, and T. Rainforth. Active testing: Sample-efficient model evaluation. In 

International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 5753–5763. PMLR, 2021. J. B. Kruskal. Three-way arrays: rank and uniqueness of trilinear decompositions, with application to arithmetic complexity and statistics. Linear algebra and its applications , 18(2):95–138, 1977. J. B. Kruskal. Rank, decomposition, and uniqueness for 3-way and n-way arrays. In Multiway data analysis , pages 7–18. 1989. D. N. Lawley and A. E. Maxwell. Factor analysis as a statistical method. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series D (The Statistician) , 12(3):209–229, 1962. D. Li, B. Jiang, L. Huang, A. Beigi, C. Zhao, Z. Tan, A. Bhattacharjee, Y. Jiang, C. Chen, T. Wu, et al. From generation to judgment: Opportunities and challenges of llm-as-a-judge. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.16594 , 2024a. H. Li, Q. Dong, J. Chen, H. Su, Y. Zhou, Q. Ai, Z. Ye, and Y. Liu. Llms-as-judges: a comprehensive survey on llm-based evaluation methods. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.05579 , 2024b. Q. Liu, Y. Zhuang, H. Bi, Z. Huang, W. Huang, J. Li, J. Yu, Z. Liu, Z. Hu, Y. Hong, et al. Survey of computerized adaptive testing: A machine learning perspective. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.00712 ,2024. F. Maia Polo, L. Weber, L. Choshen, Y. Sun, G. Xu, and M. Yurochkin. tinybenchmarks: evaluating llms with fewer examples. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 34303–34326. PMLR, 2024a. F. Maia Polo, R. Xu, L. Weber, M. Silva, O. Bhardwaj, L. Choshen, A. F. M. de Oliveira, Y. Sun, and M. Yurochkin. Efficient multi-prompt evaluation of llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.17202 , 2024b. F. Maia Polo, X. Wang, M. Yurochkin, G. Xu, M. Banerjee, and Y. Sun. Bridging human and llm judgments: Understanding and narrowing the gap. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.12792 , 2025. J. Nocedal and S. J. Wright. Numerical Optimization . Springer, New York, NY, USA, 2nd edition, 2006. J. Park, S. Jwa, M. Ren, D. Kim, and S. Choi. Offsetbias: Leveraging debiased data for tuning evaluators. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.06551 , 2024. Y. Perlitz, E. Bandel, A. Gera, O. Arviv, L. E. Dor, E. Shnarch, N. Slonim, M. Shmueli-Scheuer, and L. Choshen. Efficient benchmarking (of language models). In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 2519–2536, 2024. P. Rao and L. L. Kupper. Ties in paired-comparison experiments: A generalization of the bradley-terry model. Journal of the American Statistical Association , 62(317):194–204, 1967. M. D. Reckase. Multidimensional Item Response Theory . Statistics for Social and Behavioral Sciences. Springer, New York, illustrated edition, 2009. ISBN 978-0-387-89976-3. 

> 16 Rich Insights from Cheap Signals: Efficient Evaluations via Tensor Factorization

J. A. Rhodes. A concise proof of kruskal’s theorem on tensor decomposition. Linear Algebra and its Applications , 432(7):1818–1824, 2010. P. Rodriguez, J. Barrow, A. M. Hoyle, J. P. Lalor, R. Jia, and J. Boyd-Graber. Evaluation examples are not equally informative: How should that change nlp leaderboards? In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 4486–4503, 2021. F. Samejima. Graded response models. In Handbook of item response theory , pages 95–107. Chapman and Hall/CRC, 2016. L. Shi, C. Ma, W. Liang, W. Ma, and S. Vosoughi. Judging the judges: A systematic investigation of position bias in pairwise comparative assessments by llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.07791 , 2024. S. Somerstep, F. Maia Polo, A. F. M. de Oliveira, P. Mangal, M. Silva, O. Bhardwaj, M. Yurochkin, and S. Maity. Carrot: A cost aware rate optimal router. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.03261 , 2025. W. Song, Z. Huang, C. Cheng, W. Gao, B. Xu, G. Zhao, F. Wang, and R. Wu. Irt-router: Effective and interpretable multi-llm routing via item response theory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.01048 , 2025. A. S. Thakur, K. Choudhary, V. S. Ramayapally, S. Vaidyanathan, and D. Hupkes. Judging the judges: Evaluating alignment and vulnerabilities in llms-as-judges. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.12624 , 2024. R. Vivek, K. Ethayarajh, D. Yang, and D. Kiela. Anchor points: Benchmarking models with much fewer examples. In Proceedings of the 18th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 1576–1601, 2024. M. Wang and L. Li. Learning from binary multiway data: Probabilistic tensor decomposition and its statistical optimality. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 21(154):1–38, 2020. P. Wang, L. Li, L. Chen, Z. Cai, D. Zhu, B. Lin, Y. Cao, Q. Liu, T. Liu, and Z. Sui. Large language models are not fair evaluators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.17926 , 2023. O. Wiles, C. Zhang, I. Albuquerque, I. Kajić, S. Wang, E. Bugliarello, Y. Onoe, P. Papalampidi, I. Ktena, C. Knutsen, et al. Revisiting text-to-image evaluation with gecko: On metrics, prompts, and human ratings. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.16820 , 2024. J. M. Wooldridge. Econometric analysis of cross section and panel data . MIT press, 2010. J. Ye, Y. Wang, Y. Huang, D. Chen, Q. Zhang, N. Moniz, T. Gao, W. Geyer, C. Huang, P.-Y. Chen, et al. Justice or prejudice? quantifying biases in llm-as-a-judge. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.02736 , 2024. B. Yuan and J. Hu. Benchmarking large language models for personalized guidance in ai-enhanced learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.05346 , 2025. G. Zhang, F. E. Dorner, and M. Hardt. How benchmark prediction from fewer data misses the mark. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.07673 , 2025. L. Zheng, W.-L. Chiang, Y. Sheng, S. Zhuang, Z. Wu, Y. Zhuang, Z. Lin, Z. Li, D. Li, E. Xing, et al. Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and chatbot arena. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:46595–46623, 2023. H. Zhou, H. Huang, Z. Zhao, L. Han, H. Wang, K. Chen, M. Yang, W. Bao, J. Dong, B. Xu, et al. Lost in benchmarks? rethinking large language model benchmarking with item response theory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.15055 , 2025. 

> 17 Rich Insights from Cheap Signals: Efficient Evaluations via Tensor Factorization

Y. Zhuang, Q. Liu, Z. Pardos, P. C. Kyllonen, J. Zu, Z. Huang, S. Wang, and E. Chen. Position: Ai evaluation should learn from how we test humans. In Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning Position Paper Track , 2025. 

> 18 Rich Insights from Cheap Signals: Efficient Evaluations via Tensor Factorization

## A. Confidence intervals 

Deriving simple confidence intervals. Based on standard results in maximum likelihood estimation theory ( e.g. , Wooldridge, 2010), the asymptotic distribution of ˆ𝛾 0 is Gaussian. Specifically, 

√𝑚 (ˆ𝛾 0 − 𝛾 0) 𝑑 

→ N ( 0, Σ) as 𝑚 → ∞ ,

where “ 𝑑 

→” denotes convergence in distribution. The matrix Σ can be estimated from the data; a consistent estimate ˆΣ is typically derived from the inverse of the Hessian of the normalized negative log-likelihood loss function. In our methodology, we compute ˆΣ using the statsmodels implementation. Consequently, for a given pair (𝑖, 𝑗 ), we have 

√𝑚 ( ˆΨ𝑖, 𝑗, 0 − Ψ𝑖, 𝑗, 0) 𝑑 

→ N ( 0, 𝑣 ⊤ 

> 𝑖, 𝑗

Σ𝑣 𝑖, 𝑗 ),

or, equivalently, after standardization, √︃  

> 𝑚 𝑣 ⊤
> 𝑖, 𝑗 ˆΣ𝑣 𝑖, 𝑗

( ˆΨ𝑖, 𝑗, 0 − Ψ𝑖, 𝑗, 0) 𝑑 

→ N ( 0, 1).

It follows that the inequality 

−Φ−1

 1+𝜌 

> 2



≤√︃ 𝑚 𝑣 ⊤ 

> 𝑖, 𝑗 ˆΣ𝑣 𝑖, 𝑗

( ˆΨ𝑖, 𝑗, 0 − Ψ𝑖, 𝑗, 0) ≤ Φ−1

 1+𝜌 

> 2



⇒⇒ ˆΨ𝑖, 𝑗, 0 − Φ−1

 1+𝜌 

> 2

√︂ 𝑣 ⊤  

> 𝑖, 𝑗 ˆΣ𝑣 𝑖, 𝑗
> 𝑚

≤ Ψ𝑖, 𝑗, 0 ≤ ˆΨ𝑖, 𝑗, 0 + Φ−1

 1+𝜌 

> 2

√︂ 𝑣 ⊤ 

> 𝑖, 𝑗 ˆΣ𝑣 𝑖, 𝑗
> 𝑚

holds with probability approaching 𝜌 ∈ ( 0, 1). Therefore, we define the pointwise asymptotic confidence interval as CI 𝜌 = ˆΨ𝑖, 𝑗, 0 ± Φ−1

 1+𝜌 

> 2

√︂ 𝑣 ⊤  

> 𝑖, 𝑗 ˆΣ𝑣 𝑖, 𝑗
> 𝑚

.

Deriving confidence intervals with approximate simultaneous coverage. We fix the confidence level 𝜌 ∈ ( 0, 1) for the remainder of this section and let Ω ⊆ I × J .Our objective is to derive random intervals 𝑅 𝑖, 𝑗 providing simultaneous coverage such that 

P

Ñ(𝑖, 𝑗 ) ∈ Ω {Ψ𝑖, 𝑗, 0 ∈ 𝑅 𝑖, 𝑗 }



→ 𝜌 

as 𝑚 → ∞ . To this end, let us define a matrix 𝑉 such that its rows correspond to the vectors 𝑣 𝑖, 𝑗 for all 

(𝑖, 𝑗 ) ∈ Ω. We further define the vectors ΨΩ,0 ≜ 𝑉𝛾 0 and ˆΨΩ,0 ≜ 𝑉 ˆ𝛾 0. Note that the entries of ΨΩ,0 (resp. 

ˆΨΩ,0) correspond to Ψ𝑖, 𝑗, 0 (resp. ˆΨ𝑖, 𝑗, 0) for indices in Ω. By the properties of linear transformations of Gaussian vectors, √𝑚 ( ˆΨΩ,0 − ΨΩ,0) 𝑑 

→ N ( 0, Ξ),

where Ξ = 𝑉 Σ𝑉 𝑇 . We define the estimator ˆΞ = 𝑉 ˆΣ𝑉 𝑇 . We then construct the intervals as 

𝑅 𝑖, 𝑗 = ˆΨ𝑖, 𝑗, 0 ± 𝑐 √︃ cVar ( ˆΨ𝑖, 𝑗, 0 ) 

> 𝑚

,

where cVar ( ˆΨ𝑖, 𝑗, 0) denotes the estimate of the asymptotic variance of ˆΨ𝑖, 𝑗, 0, corresponding to the diagonal entry of ˆΞ associated with (𝑖, 𝑗 ). Here, 𝑐 is a positive real constant that requires calibration. 

> 19 Rich Insights from Cheap Signals: Efficient Evaluations via Tensor Factorization

To determine the value of 𝑐 , observe that 

P

Ñ(𝑖, 𝑗 ) ∈ Ω {Ψ𝑖, 𝑗, 0 ∈ 𝑅 𝑖, 𝑗 }



= P Ñ(𝑖, 𝑗 ) ∈ Ω

(

| ˆΨ𝑖, 𝑗, 0 −Ψ𝑖, 𝑗, 0 |√︃ cVar ( ˆΨ𝑖, 𝑗, 0 )/ 𝑚 

≤ 𝑐 

)! 

= P max (𝑖, 𝑗 ) ∈ Ω

| ˆΨ𝑖, 𝑗, 0 −Ψ𝑖, 𝑗, 0 |√︃ cVar ( ˆΨ𝑖, 𝑗, 0 )/ 𝑚 

≤ 𝑐 

!

.

Consequently, we must select the constant 𝑐 satisfying 

P max (𝑖, 𝑗 ) ∈ Ω

| ˆΨ𝑖, 𝑗, 0 −Ψ𝑖, 𝑗, 0 |√︃ cVar ( ˆΨ𝑖, 𝑗, 0 )/ 𝑚 

≤ 𝑐 

!

= 𝜌. 

The exact finite-sample distribution of the maximum statistic is unknown. In practice, however, we estimate 𝑐 via Monte Carlo integration, relying on the fact that the joint distribution of the standardized terms is asymptotically Gaussian with zero means and unit marginal variances. As 𝑚 grows, the quantiles of the maximum statistic converge to the quantiles of a limiting distribution defined by the maximum absolute value of a multivariate Gaussian vector with covariance matrix 𝐷 −1/2Ξ𝐷 −1/2,where 𝐷 = diag (Ξ).The ideas discussed in this section follow the general framework for simultaneous inference in parametric models described by Hothorn et al. (2008). 

## B. Fitting algorithm 

Algorithm 1 gives a description for the first stage fitting process. We parameterize the cutoffs 𝛽 using their differences ( 𝛿 ) to ensure monotonicity. Moreover, while it does reduce the model’s flexibility, we found that normalizing the columns of Θ and 𝐴 during optimization gives better results. 

> 20 Rich Insights from Cheap Signals: Efficient Evaluations via Tensor Factorization

Algorithm 1 Stage 1 fitting via Projected Adam 

Input: (i) Autorater dataset D (𝑎 ) , (ii) Adam hyperparameters, (iii) batch size 𝐵 , (iv) epochs 𝑇 𝑎 , (v) positivity threshold 𝜖 ≥ 0;

Output: Estimated autorater parameters bΛ(𝑎 ) (containing weights and cutoff gaps 𝛿 );  

> 1:

Initialize parameters Λ(𝑎 ) randomly.  

> 2:

Initialize Adam_State.  

> 3:

for 𝑡 = 1 . . . 𝑇 𝑎 do  

> 4:

Shuffle D (𝑎 ) . 

> 5:

for each mini-batch B ⊂ D (𝑎 ) of size 𝐵 do  

> 6:

1. Forward Pass (Construct Cutoffs):  

> 7:

Construct ordered cutoffs 𝛽 from learnable gaps 𝛿 : 

> 8:

𝛽 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑦

← 𝛽 (𝑘 ) 

> 1

+

> 𝑦

∑︁ 

> 𝑙 =2

𝛿 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑙
> 9:

2. Optimization Step (Adam):  

> 10:

Compute gradient of NLL w.r.t Λ(𝑎 ) : 

> 11:

𝑔 ← ∇ Λ(𝑎 )∑︁  

> 𝐷 𝑛 ∈ B

L( Λ, 𝐷 𝑛 ) 

> 12:

Update parameters using Adam rule:  

> 13:

(Λ(𝑎 ) , Adam_State ) ← AdamStep (Λ(𝑎 ) , 𝑔, Adam_State , Adam_Hyperparameters ) 

> 14:

3. Enforce Constraints & Projections:  

> 15:

Positivity for gaps (ensures monotonicity 𝛽 𝑦 < 𝛽 𝑦 +1):  

> 16:

𝛿 ← max (𝛿, 𝜖 ) 

> 17:

Column-wise 𝐿 2 Normalization:  

> 18:

𝐴 ← 𝐴 · diag (∥ 𝐴 ·𝑘 ∥−12 ), Θ ← Θ · diag (∥ Θ·𝑘 ∥−12 ) 

> 19:

end for  

> 20:

end for  

> 21:

return bΛ(𝑎 ) ← Λ(𝑎 )

## C. Identifiability 

In this section, we study sufficient conditions for parameter identifiability. Because this type of result is general, we do not need to make a distinction between human raters and autoraters. To establish the identifiability of the model, we show that the map connecting model parameters and data distribution is bijective. This is true if Λ can be uniquely recovered from the observed ordinal probabilities. To that end, we start with a practical assumption about the data collection process. It simply states that we have a chance of observing every combination of model(s), prompt, and rater. This condition ensures that asymptotically we have access to the full set of choice probabilities for all model-prompt-rater combinations, allowing us to form the complete system of equations necessary to uniquely solve for the unknown parameters without dealing with missing data. 

Condition C.1 (Sampling) . Every triple (𝑖, 𝑗, 𝑘 ) is sampled with positive probability. 

See that for single-sided raters simultaneous shifts in 𝛽 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑦

and Ψ𝑖, 𝑗,𝑘 has no effect the probability distribution. Setting the first cutoff 𝛽 (𝑘 ) 

> 1

= 0 resolves the shift ambiguity inherent in ordinal models. 

Condition C.2 (Shifts) . Assume 𝛽 (𝑘 ) 

> 1

= 0 if 𝑘 ∈ K point .

Now, we propose a block-structured sparsity constraint. This will be useful for dealing with side-by-side raters. Let us define the set of side-by-side (pairwise) raters as Kpair ⊆ K .

> 21 Rich Insights from Cheap Signals: Efficient Evaluations via Tensor Factorization

Condition C.3 (Block-Structured Sparsity) . The tensor rank 𝑅 is partitioned into two sets R1 =

{1, . . . , 𝑅 1} and R2 = {𝑅 1 + 1, . . . , 𝑅 }. The factor matrices satisfy: 1. Θ0,𝑟 = 0 for all 𝑟 ∈ R 1.2. Γ𝑘,𝑟 = 0 for all 𝑟 ∈ R 2 and 𝑘 ∈ K pair ,. 

We introduce a classic condition from tensor analysis (Kruskal, 1977, 1989; Rhodes, 2010) that guarantees the uniqueness of the CP decomposition up to permutation of its rank-one components and the scaling of the factor vectors within each component. It ensures that the factor matrices are sufficiently diverse, preventing multiple different decompositions from yielding the same capability tensor Ψ.

Definition C.4 (Kruskal rank (Kruskal, 1977, 1989; Rhodes, 2010)) . The Kruskal rank of a matrix 𝑀 ,denoted 𝑅 𝑀 , is the largest number 𝑟 such that every set of 𝑟 columns of 𝑀 is linearly independent. 

Condition C.5. The Kruskal rank of the factor matrices satisfy 𝑅 Θ + 𝑅 𝐴 + 𝑅 Γ ≥ 2𝑅 + 2.

The final set of constraints resolves the remaining scaling and permutation ambiguities left over after applying Kruskal’s theorem (Kruskal, 1977, 1989; Rhodes, 2010). 

Condition C.6. The columns of Θ and 𝐴 have unit Euclidean norms. Moreover, the columns of Γ, denoted 

Γ·,𝑟 , have distinct norms and are ordered such that ∥Γ·,𝑟 ∥2 > ∥Γ·,𝑟 +1 ∥2. Finally, the last elements Θ𝐼 −1,𝑟 

and 𝐴 𝐽 −1,𝑟 are positive for all 𝑟 = 1, . . . , 𝑅 .

We are ready to present our main result. 

Theorem C.7. Under Conditions C.1-C.6, the cutoffs 𝛽 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑦

, the capability tensor Ψ, and the factor matrices 

Θ, 𝐴, Γ are identifiable. 

C.1. Proof of Theorem C.7 

We split the proof into two steps, where in the first step we show that the capability tensor Ψ and the cutoffs 𝛽 (𝑘 ) are uniquely determined by the observed probabilities, and in the second step we demonstrate that the factor matrices Θ, 𝐴, and Γ are uniquely recovered from Ψ given the rank and sparsity constraints. 

Step 1: Identification of Ψ and 𝛽 from categorical probabilities. We define 𝑝 𝑖, 𝑗,𝑘,𝑦 ≜ P(𝑌 𝑖, 𝑗,𝑘 ≤

𝑦 ) = 𝜎 (𝛽 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑦 +1

− Δ𝑖, 𝑗,𝑘 ). Since the logistic CDF 𝜎 is strictly increasing, its inverse 𝜎 −1 is well-defined. 

• Single-Sided Templates: Here, Δ𝑖, 𝑗,𝑘 = Ψ𝑖, 𝑗,𝑘 . By Condition C.3, 𝛽 (𝑘 ) 

> 1

= 0 for these templates. For the first category ( 𝑦 = 0), we have: 

𝜎 −1 ( 𝑝 𝑖, 𝑗,𝑘, 0) = 𝛽 (𝑘 ) 

> 1

− Ψ𝑖, 𝑗,𝑘 = −Ψ𝑖, 𝑗,𝑘 =⇒ Ψ𝑖, 𝑗,𝑘 = −𝜎 −1 ( 𝑝 𝑖, 𝑗,𝑘, 0).

With Ψ𝑖, 𝑗,𝑘 identified, the remaining cutoffs are identified via: 

𝛽 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑦 +1

= 𝜎 −1 ( 𝑝 𝑖, 𝑗,𝑘,𝑦 ) + Ψ𝑖, 𝑗,𝑘 for 𝑦 ∈ { 1, . . . , 𝐶 𝑘 − 1}.

> 22 Rich Insights from Cheap Signals: Efficient Evaluations via Tensor Factorization

• Side-by-Side Templates ( 𝑘 ∈ K pair ): Here, Δ𝑖, 𝑗,𝑘 = Ψ𝑖 1, 𝑗,𝑘 − Ψ𝑖 0, 𝑗,𝑘 . Let 𝑖 = (𝑖 1, 𝑖 0) and ¯𝑖 = (𝑖 0, 𝑖 1).Inverting the logistic function, we get: 

𝜎 −1 ( 𝑝 𝑖, 𝑗,𝑘,𝑦 ) = 𝛽 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑦 +1

− ( Ψ𝑖 1, 𝑗,𝑘 − Ψ𝑖 0, 𝑗,𝑘 )

𝜎 −1 ( 𝑝 ¯𝑖, 𝑗,𝑘,𝑦 ) = 𝛽 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑦 +1

− ( Ψ𝑖 0, 𝑗,𝑘 − Ψ𝑖 1, 𝑗,𝑘 ).

Summing these yields: 

𝛽 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑦 +1

= 𝜎 −1 ( 𝑝 𝑖, 𝑗,𝑘,𝑦 )+ 𝜎 −1 ( 𝑝 ¯𝑖, 𝑗,𝑘,𝑦 ) 

> 2

.

Subtracting them identifies the difference Δ𝑖, 𝑗,𝑘 = Ψ𝑖 1, 𝑗,𝑘 − Ψ𝑖 0, 𝑗,𝑘 . To identify the absolute values of Ψ, we note that for 𝑘 ∈ K pair , the reference model 𝑖 = 0 satisfies: 

Ψ0, 𝑗,𝑘 = Í𝑅 1 

> 𝑟 =1

Θ0,𝑟 𝐴 𝑗,𝑟 Γ𝑘,𝑟 + Í𝑅 𝑟 =𝑅 1+1 Θ0,𝑟 𝐴 𝑗,𝑟 Γ𝑘,𝑟 = 0 + 0 = 0

by Condition C.3. Consequently, Ψ𝑖 1, 𝑗,𝑘 = Δ(𝑖 1,0), 𝑗,𝑘 is identified. 

Step 2: Identification of Factor Matrices via Tensor Uniqueness. Having identified the tensor Ψ,we apply Kruskal’s Theorem (Theorem 4a in Kruskal (1989)). Condition C.5 ( 𝑅 Θ + 𝑅 𝐴 + 𝑅 Γ ≥ 2𝑅 + 2)guarantees that Ψ has a unique CP decomposition up to a permutation matrix 𝑃 and diagonal scaling matrices 𝐷 1, 𝐷 2, 𝐷 3.

• Eliminating Permutation Ambiguity: Condition C.6 orders the columns of Γ by strictly de-creasing Euclidean norms. Any permutation 𝑃 ≠ 𝐼 would change this ordering, violating the condition. Thus, 𝑃 = 𝐼 .

• Eliminating Scaling Ambiguity: We have ˜Θ = Θ𝐷 1 and ˜𝐴 = 𝐴𝐷 2. The unit-norm constraint 

∥Θ·,𝑟 ∥2 = 1 and ∥ ˜Θ·,𝑟 ∥2 = 1 implies the diagonal entries of 𝐷 1 must be ±1. The constraint that the last elements Θ𝐼 −1,𝑟 and 𝐴 𝐽 −1,𝑟 are positive forces these multipliers to be exactly +1. Thus 

𝐷 1 = 𝐷 2 = 𝐼 . Since 𝐷 1 𝐷 2 𝐷 3 = 𝐼 for the CP decomposition to hold, 𝐷 3 must also be the identity. Since the unique set of factor matrices {Θ, 𝐴, Γ} must satisfy the zero patterns defined in Condition C.3, the parameters are uniquely identified. □

## D. Experiments 

D.1. Benchmark subset cohesion 

In this subsection, we aim to better understand (i) whether the values in Figure 2 could be attributed to chance, and (ii) how to characterize when a group of prompts is cohesive. In Table 1, we address point (i) by performing a permutation hypothesis test of independence. We test whether the group assignment is independent of the representations 𝛼 𝑗 . Our test statistic is the cohesion measure itself, as we aim to determine if a statistical dependence between group ID and prompt embeddings is manifested by the cohesion of prompts within groups. Table 1 presents the p-values; the results (low p-values for cohesive groups versus higher p-values for non-cohesive groups) provide evidence that the patterns observed in Figure 2 are not due to chance. Table 2 displays the number of prompts for each group. A clear finding from Gecko is that larger, more generic groups ( e.g. , “landmarks”) are typically less cohesive. This intuitive result suggests that, in such cases, practitioners could further decompose these larger groups into more cohesive subgroups. In BGB, all groups share the same size, showing that even a small group can be non-cohesive. 

> 23 Rich Insights from Cheap Signals: Efficient Evaluations via Tensor Factorization

Table 1 | P-values for Gecko and BGB across Cohesive and Non-Cohesive tasks 

Category Task p-val 

Gecko - Cohesive lang/compositional:compositional-3E-2A 0.000 rel/action:action_rev/3 0.001 rel/scale:same_size 0.063 att/count:additive_3 0.001 att/color:abstract 0.028 

Gecko - Non-Cohesive ne/landmarks:landmarks 0.194 render/text:text_numerical 0.585 lang/complexity_nopeople:complexity_negation 0.824 att/style_100yr:style_100yr/visual_medium 0.603 rel/spatial:spatial_basic_rev 0.416 

BGB - Cohesive determine_what_is_wrong 0.000 reward_modeling 0.000 interplanetary_diplomacy 0.000 multi_step 0.001 time_traveler_dilemma 0.000 

BGB - Non-Cohesive thinking_for_doing 0.954 simulator 0.849 honesty 0.732 web_browsing 0.729 faux_pas_explanation 0.709 Table 2 | Number of Prompts for Gecko and BGB across Cohesive and Non-Cohesive tasks 

Category Task # prompts 

Gecko - Cohesive lang/compositional:compositional-3E-2A 10 rel/action:action_rev/3 8rel/scale:same_size 6att/count:additive_3 11 att/color:abstract 8

Gecko - Non-Cohesive ne/landmarks:landmarks 100 render/text:text_numerical 32 lang/complexity_nopeople:complexity_negation 19 att/style_100yr:style_100yr/visual_medium 22 rel/spatial:spatial_basic_rev 28 

BGB - Cohesive determine_what_is_wrong 10 reward_modeling 10 interplanetary_diplomacy 10 multi_step 10 time_traveler_dilemma 10 

BGB - Non-Cohesive thinking_for_doing 10 simulator 10 honesty 10 web_browsing 10 faux_pas_explanation 10 

> 24 Rich Insights from Cheap Signals: Efficient Evaluations via Tensor Factorization

D.2. Explaining the performance gap on LMArena 

Table 3 explains the gap between LLaMa-3.3-70b and Gemini-2.5-Pro according to some (overlapping) prompt tags present on the LMArena dataset using Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) regression. For example, “specificity” 15 gives LLaMa-3.3-70b a relative advantage over Gemini. Table 3 | Explains the gap between LLaMa-3.3-70b and Gemini-2.5-Pro (OLS) 

Variable Coef. Std.Err. t P> |𝑡 |

const -0.7713 0.037 -20.818 0.000 category_tag_criteria_v0_1_specificity 0.1631 0.040 4.103 0.000 category_tag_criteria_v0_1_domain_knowledge -0.1058 0.044 -2.427 0.015 category_tag_criteria_v0_1_complexity -0.0100 0.035 -0.283 0.777 category_tag_criteria_v0_1_technical_accuracy 0.0032 0.039 0.082 0.935 category_tag_criteria_v0_1_real_world 0.0001 0.039 0.003 0.997 category_tag_criteria_v0_1_problem_solving -0.0622 0.040 -1.549 0.121 category_tag_criteria_v0_1_creativity 0.0200 0.036 0.559 0.576 category_tag_creative_writing_v0_1_creative_writing 0.0285 0.055 0.519 0.604 category_tag_math_v0_1_math 0.0675 0.055 1.231 0.218 category_tag_if_v0_1_if 0.0312 0.043 0.730 0.465 is_code 0.1304 0.038 3.421 0.001 

Model Summary 

R-squared 0.011 Adjusted R-squared 0.009 F-statistic 4.799 Prob(F-statistic) 2.17e-07 Number of observations 4777 

D.3. First stage fit diagnostic 

Figure 9 depicts the first-stage losses, showing the expected pattern of decreasing losses and overfitting when 𝑅 increases. 

Figure 9 | First stage losses. 

> 15 Here, the specificity tag probably indicates how precise and well-defined a prompt is, measuring whether it asks for a concrete, unambiguous response rather than something broad or open-ended. Prompts with high specificity are narrowly scoped and clearly directed, making it easier for a model to generate a focused answer.
> 25 Rich Insights from Cheap Signals: Efficient Evaluations via Tensor Factorization

D.4. Second stage performance with varying rank 

Figure 10 shows how 𝑅 impacts the second-stage losses. This plot shows that first-stage and second-stage losses are only correlated up to a certain point (Figure 9). 

Figure 10 | Varying the rank 𝑅 and assessing impact on predictive performance. We keep 80% of the dataset for training and the rest for testing. 

D.5. Second stage with varying number of human annotations using autoraters as baselines 

Figure 11 compares our methods against baselines, including individual autoraters. 

Figure 11 | We compare our approaches with the constant baseline and a logistic regression model trained on the outputs of individual autoraters. When the autorater evaluation template matches the human template, we simply average the realizations 𝑌 𝑖, 𝑗,𝑘 for the (𝑖, 𝑗, 𝑘 ) of interest and use this average as a feature for the logistic model. Conversely, when autoraters use single-sided templates while humans perform side-by-side comparisons, we average the realizations of 𝑌 𝑖, 𝑗,𝑘 for each of the two models being evaluated and take the difference between these averages to obtain the features for the logistic regression. 

D.6. Second stage with varying number of human annotations using autoraters as baselines 

Figure 12 shows how the fraction of used autoraters impacts the second-stage losses. As expected, we see a negative trend. 

> 26 Rich Insights from Cheap Signals: Efficient Evaluations via Tensor Factorization

Figure 12 | When varying the fraction of autoraters used, we observe that the highest gains occur at the lowest fractions. This suggests that the collective signal from autoraters may begin to saturate if sufficient diversity is not provided. In this specific experiment, we fix the fraction and sample multiple combinations of judges to satisfy that proportion; the error bars represent the variability across these combinations and different data splits. We allocate 80% of the dataset for training and use the remainder for testing. 

D.7. Category-specific rankings (all plots) 

We expand Figures 3 and 4 to contain all top cohesive categories. 

Figure 13 | This is a version Figure 3 with more categories. 

> 27 Rich Insights from Cheap Signals: Efficient Evaluations via Tensor Factorization

Figure 14 | This is a version Figure 4 with more categories. 

D.8. Category-specific rankings (whole data) 

We complement the results of Figures 3 and 4 using the full human data to estimate human parameters. We see reduced interval lengths with qualitative results maintained. 

> 28 Rich Insights from Cheap Signals: Efficient Evaluations via Tensor Factorization

Figure 15 | This plot illustrates how the estimates improve when we scale the number of human labels, in contrast to Figure 3, which utilizes only 10% . Overall, we observe that the model ordering is maintained, though the confidence intervals are evidently narrower. In practice, a practitioner could calibrate the required number of human labels by running a preliminary study to estimate the sample size needed to achieve a specific level of precision (knowing that the interval length is proportional to 

1/√𝑚 , where 𝑚 is the number of human annotations); this type of approach is commonly employed in Monte Carlo simulation for integral estimation. 

> 29 Rich Insights from Cheap Signals: Efficient Evaluations via Tensor Factorization

Figure 16 | This plot illustrates how the estimates improve when we scale the number of human labels, in contrast to Figure 4. As for Gecko, we observe that the model ordering is roughly maintained, though the confidence intervals are evidently narrower. 

D.9. Exploring strengths and weaknesses of different models (whole data) 

We complement the results of Figure 5 using the full human data to estimate human parameters. We see reduced interval lengths with qualitative results maintained. 

> 30 Rich Insights from Cheap Signals: Efficient Evaluations via Tensor Factorization

Figure 17 | Fine-grained comparison of model capabilities using 100% of human annotations. Top: Difference in estimated scores between Imagen and Muse on Gecko prompts, colored by category. Imagen excels in text rendering, while Muse shows advantages in object counting. Bottom: Difference between LLaMa-2-13b and GPT-3.5-Turbo on BigGen Bench prompts. GPT-3.5-Turbo demonstrates a significant advantage in reasoning-related prompts. 

> 31 Rich Insights from Cheap Signals: Efficient Evaluations via Tensor Factorization

## E. Autoraters 

In this section, we explore in more detail how autoraters were built. 

E.1. Side-by-side templates 

E.1.1. Personas 

Table 4 | Side-by-side personas (from Gecko) 

Persona Archetype Primary Objective Evaluation Methodology Persona 1 

Original Template The Professional Baseline Determine faithful and complete representation of the text. Justify choices based on key elements of the prompt while explicitly ignoring artistic quality. 

Persona 2 

Quality Assurance Inspector The Technical Specialist Check conformance to a “Design Specification.” Identify and report the severity of deviations (critical, major, minor) rather than subjective style preferences. 

Persona 3 

Scientific Abstract The Academic Extremist Assess semantic correspondence and alignment. Deconstruct the prompt into core semantic components (subject, action, attributes) and systematically evaluate the rendering of each. 

Persona 4 

Conversational The Human Communicator Determine which image “followed directions” better. Provide a casual, plain-English explanation of thoughts and misses, disregarding which image is “prettier.” Table 5 | Side-by-side and Single-sided personas (from LMArena) 

Persona Archetype Guiding Principle Methodology Persona 1 

The Professional Baseline Objective Auditor Balanced, 1:1 audit. Objective and holistic testing for single key qualities. Verify factual accuracy, check completeness of explicit prompt parts, assess helpfulness, and identify implicit needs. 

Persona 2 

The Pragmatic Professional Busy Professional Actionability and efficiency. Value direct, usable solutions and penalize “fluff.” Probe for concrete actions (code/steps), ensure efficiency, identify conversational filler, and check for optimal solutions. Continued on next page... 

> 32 Rich Insights from Cheap Signals: Efficient Evaluations via Tensor Factorization

Table 5 – continued from previous page Persona Archetype Guiding Principle Methodology Persona 3 

he Critical Fact-Checker Meticulous Researcher Factual accuracy and logical soundness. Find all objective flaws (errors, hallucinations). Deconstruct key claims, formulate verification questions, check for hallucinations/fabricated sources, and audit logical consistency. 

Persona 4 

The Conversational Partner Friendly Human Tone and naturalness. Reward human-like warmth; penalize robotic or preachy responses. Assess the overall feeling/friendliness, check for robotic “AI-isms,” and evaluate if the tone fits the context. 

Persona 5 

The Creative Ideator Innovator Originality and imagination. Reward novel ideas; penalize generic or cliché templates. Detect clichés, verify at least one novel/surprising idea, ensure variety, and check if ideas are generative. 

Persona 6 

The Educator Teacher Clarity of explanation (pedagogy). Help a student learn effectively; avoid confusion. Check accuracy, break down complex topics, define jargon, ensure logical structure, and scaffold concepts sequentially. 

Persona 7 

The Meticulous Editor Copy Editor Conciseness and polish. “Clarity is King.” Remove waffle and redundancy. Check mechanics (spelling/grammar), identify filler language (“waffle”), remove redundancy, and ensure flow/precision. 

Persona 8 

The Coder & Systems Thinker Software Developer Technical and structural accuracy. Prioritize correctness, formatting, and logic. Verify syntactic correctness, check strict adherence to formats (JSON/Markdown), ensure best practices, and test robustness/edge cases. 

Persona 9 

The AI Ethicist Safety Officer Safety and responsibility. Minimize harm; a safe refusal is better than a harmful answer. Check for overt harm, detect subtle bias/stereotypes, identify unqualified advice, and ensure appropriate refusals. 

Persona 10 

The Beginner Layperson (Zero Knowledge) Simplicity. Identify confusing jargon; the response must be understandable by a 12-year-old. Detect unexplained jargon, check for simple analogies, and ensure the tone is simple but not condescending. 

Persona 11 

The Deep-Dive Researcher Expert Researcher Depth and completeness. Reward comprehensive, nuanced, and thorough answers. Check for superficiality, ensure all facets are addressed, explore nuances/edge cases, and synthesize details. Continued on next page... 

> 33 Rich Insights from Cheap Signals: Efficient Evaluations via Tensor Factorization

Table 5 – continued from previous page Persona Archetype Guiding Principle Methodology Persona 12 

The Formatting Specialist Technical Writer Structure and readability. Reward effective visual hierarchy; penalize “walls of text.” Check for dense text blocks, evaluate the use of lists/bolding, and ensure the layout guides the user’s eye effectively. 

E.1.2. Examples 

Side-by-side evaluation template (Example from Gecko) 

Gemini Autorater Instructions : Text - to - Image Alignment ( Comparative ) ## 1. Objective Your primary goal is to evaluate two AI - generated images to determine which better captures the information in the prompt and to what degree . ## 2. Task Details - ** Prompt :** "{ prompt_placeholder }" - ** Left Image :** Generated by the " Left " model . - ** Right Image :** Generated by the " Right " model . - ** Note :** The " Left " and " Right " labels are random and must not influence your decision . ## 3. Evaluation Process You must follow these steps in order : ** Step 1: Provide a Detailed Explanation .** Write a clear justification comparing how each image captures the key elements of the prompt . Ignore artistic quality . ** Step 2: Make Your Decision .** - Choose ** Left ** if the left image is better aligned with the prompt . - Choose ** Right ** if the right image is better aligned with the prompt . - Choose ** Tie ** if both images are equally good or poor . ** Your decision must be based purely on which image is a more faithful and complete representation of the text prompt .** ** Step 3: State Your Preference Level .** After choosing the winner , state how much better it is using one of these three levels : - ** Slightly Better **: The winner is only marginally better . - ** Moderately Better **: The winner is clearly and noticeably better . - ** Significantly Better **: The winner is vastly superior to the other option . 

> 34 Rich Insights from Cheap Signals: Efficient Evaluations via Tensor Factorization

( If you chose " Tie " , set the " Preference level " to **" N / A "**.) ## 4. Output Format You MUST provide your answer in the following JSON format . {{ " alignment_comparison ": [{{ " rating_dimension ": " Explanation " , " answer ": " Your detailed explanation comparing the left image and the right image goes here ." }} , {{ " rating_dimension ": " Best model " , " answer ": " Right " }} , {{ " rating_dimension ": " Preference level " , " answer ": " Moderately Better " }} ]}} ** VERY IMPORTANT :** - The value for " Best model " must be one of : ‘" Left " ‘ , ‘" Right " ‘ , or ‘" Tie " ‘. - The value for " Preference level " must be one of : ‘" Slightly Better " ‘ , ‘" Moderately Better " ‘ , ‘" Significantly Better " ‘ , or ‘" N / A " ‘. - Do not include any text outside the main JSON structure . 

Side-by-side evaluation template (Example from LMArena) 

You are a helpful and impartial AI assistant tasked with evaluating model responses . Prioritize helpfulness , accuracy , and completeness . ## CRITICAL INSTRUCTION : Evaluation Must Be in English ** Even if the user prompt and the model responses are in alanguage other than English , your entire evaluation , including the explanation and all ratings , MUST be written in English .** This is a strict requirement for data consistency . You are expected to understand the non - English content and then provide your comparative analysis * in English *. ## Objective Your goal is to evaluate two AI - generated text responses to determine which better answers the user ’ s prompt . ## Task Details - ** Prompt :** "{ prompt_placeholder }" - ** First Response :** "{ first_response_placeholder }" - ** Second Response :** "{ second_response_placeholder }" 

> 35 Rich Insights from Cheap Signals: Efficient Evaluations via Tensor Factorization

## Evaluation Process 1. ** Explanation :** Compare how each response addresses the prompt ’ s key elements . 2. ** Decision :** Choose ** First ** , ** Second ** , or ** Tie **. 3. ** Preference Level :** How much better is the winner ? Use ** Slightly Better ** , ** Moderately Better ** , ** Significantly Better ** , or ** N / A ** ( for a Tie ) . ## Output Format You MUST provide your answer in the following JSON format . {{ " alignment_comparison ": [{{ " rating_dimension ": " Explanation " , " answer ": " Your detailed explanation comparing the first response and the second response goes here , written from the perspective of your assigned persona ." }} , {{ " rating_dimension ": " Best model " , " answer ": " Second " }} , {{ " rating_dimension ": " Preference level " , " answer ": " Moderately Better " }} ]}} ** VERY IMPORTANT :** - " Best model " must be one of : ‘" First " ‘ , ‘" Second " ‘ , or ‘" Tie " ‘. - " Preference level " must be one of : ‘" Slightly Better " ‘ , ‘" Moderately Better " ‘ , ‘" Significantly Better " ‘ , or ‘" N / A " ‘. 

E.2. Single-sided templates 

E.2.1. Personas 

The personas for LMArena are already in Table 5. Table 6 | Single-sided personas (from Gecko) 

Persona Archetype Guiding Principle Methodology Persona 1 

The Compre-hensive Inspector 1:1 Auditor Atomic and objective verification. Each item must test a single, isolated component (No attributes combined). Deconstruct the prompt into distinct factual components (Objects, Attributes, Style, Text) and formulate binary (yes/no) questions for each. Continued on next page... 

> 36 Rich Insights from Cheap Signals: Efficient Evaluations via Tensor Factorization

Table 6 – continued from previous page Persona Archetype Guiding Principle Methodology Persona 2 

The Holistic Grader Conceptual Critic Synthesis and conceptual integrity. Assess how parts work together to form a coherent narrative. Identify the core concept, assess the blend of style and mood, and verify if the image tells a clear, understandable story. 

Persona 3 

The Structural Analyst Spatial Verifier Purely quantitative and relational. Focus exclusively on counts (how many?) and positions (where?), ignoring aesthetics. Scan for specific numbers (object enumeration) and prepositions (spatial relationships) to verify layout and quantities. 

Persona 4 

The Quality & Realism Auditor Technical Critic Technical merit and physical plausibility. Indifferent to artistic intent; looks for objective flaws. Check for technical artifacts (glitches, anatomy errors) and verify adherence to physics (lighting consistency, gravity, perspective). 

E.2.2. Evaluation prompts 

Single-sided evaluation template (Example from Gecko) 

** Role :** You are a meticulous AI visual verification agent . Your function is to objectively evaluate an image against aprovided checklist and return your findings in a structured format . ** Task & Reasoning Process :** You will be given an image and a numbered checklist . Before generating your final response , you ** must ** follow this internal reasoning process for each item on the checklist : 1. ** Analyze the Image :** Scrutinize the image and provide adetailed , objective description of its contents . This description must be a single string . 2. ** Analyze the Statement :** Read the checklist statement carefully to understand what you need to verify . 3. ** Scan the Image :** Scrutinize the image for direct visual evidence that confirms or refutes the statement . 4. ** Formulate a Justification :** Based on the evidence , write a brief , clear sentence that explains * why * the statement is true or false . 5. ** Assign a Label :** Determine the final label . Use ‘1 ‘ if the statement is true and ‘0 ‘ if it is false . ** Output Requirements :** After completing your internal reasoning for all checklist items , your response ** must be a single , valid Python 

> 37 Rich Insights from Cheap Signals: Efficient Evaluations via Tensor Factorization

dictionary **. Do not include any introductory text , explanations , or markdown code formatting ( like ‘ ‘‘‘ python ‘) outside of this dictionary . * The dictionary must contain a key ‘" image_description " ‘ whose value is the detailed description of the image . * The remaining keys of the dictionary must be the integer numbers from the checklist ( e . g . , ‘1 ‘ , ‘2 ‘ , ‘3 ‘) . * The value for each numbered key must be another dictionary containing exactly two key - value pairs : 1. ‘" explanation " ‘: The single - sentence justification from your reasoning process . 2. ‘" label " ‘: The integer ‘1 ‘ ( for true ) or ‘0 ‘ ( for false ) . -----### Example ** Provided Checklist :** ‘‘‘‘ 1. Is there exactly one Yoshi ? 2. Is there exactly one skateboard ? 3. Is the skateboard positioned * down * the hill ? 4. Is Yoshi positioned * on * the skateboard ? <! - - end list --> ‘‘‘‘ ** Your Expected Output :** ‘‘‘ python {{ " image_description ": " A green dinosaur - like creature , Yoshi , is standing on a red skateboard with orange wheels . He is positioned at the top of a grassy hill . The skateboard is pointing up the hill , away from the viewer ." , 1: {{" explanation ": " The image contains exactly one character identifiable as Yoshi ." , " label ": 1}} , 2: {{" explanation ": " There is only one skateboard visible in the image ." , " label ": 1}} , 3: {{" explanation ": " The skateboard is pointing up the hill , not down ." , " label ": 0}} , 4: {{" explanation ": " Yoshi is standing with both feet on the surface of the skateboard ." , " label ": 1}} }} ‘‘‘‘ -----** Begin Analysis .** 

> 38 Rich Insights from Cheap Signals: Efficient Evaluations via Tensor Factorization

** Checklist to Verify :** { checklist } 

Single-sided evaluation template (Example from LMArena) 

** Role :** You are a meticulous AI text verification agent . Your function is to objectively evaluate a text response against a provided checklist and return your findings in a structured format . ** Task & Reasoning Process :** You will be given a text response and a numbered checklist . Before generating your final response , you ** must ** follow this internal reasoning process for each item on the checklist : 1. ** Analyze the Text Response :** Scrutinize the provided text response and provide a brief , objective summary of its key points , style , and structure . This summary must be asingle string . 2. ** Analyze the Statement :** Read the checklist statement carefully to understand what you need to verify . 3. ** Scan the Text :** Scrutinize the text response for direct textual evidence ( quotes , phrasing , content , or lack thereof ) that confirms or refutes the statement . 4. ** Formulate a Justification :** Based on the evidence , write a brief , clear sentence that explains * why * the statement is true or false * with respect to the text response *. 5. ** Assign a Label :** Determine the final label . Use ‘1 ‘ if the statement is true and ‘0 ‘ if the statement is false . ** Output Requirements :** After completing your internal reasoning for all checklist items , your response must be a single , valid JSON object . Do not include any introductory text , explanations , or markdown code formatting ( like ‘ ‘‘‘ python ‘) outside of this dictionary . * The dictionary must contain a key ‘" text_analysis " ‘ whose value is the objective summary of the text response . * The remaining keys of the dictionary must be the strings representing the checklist items ( e . g . , "1" , "2" , "3") . * The value for each numbered key must be another dictionary containing exactly two key - value pairs : 1. ‘" explanation " ‘: The single - sentence justification from your reasoning process . 2. ‘" label " ‘: The integer ‘1 ‘ ( for true ) or ‘0 ‘ ( for false ) . -----### Example 

> 39 Rich Insights from Cheap Signals: Efficient Evaluations via Tensor Factorization

** Provided Text Response :** ‘‘‘‘ Here ’ s a function to do that : import json def get \ _name ( json \ _string ) : data = json . loads ( json \ _string ) return data [" name "] ‘‘‘ ** Provided Checklist :** ‘‘‘ 1. Is the code syntactically valid Python ? 2. Does the code use ‘ json . loads () ‘? 3. Does the code include error handling ( like ‘ try ... except ‘) ? 4. Is the function ’ s name ‘ get_name ‘? <! - - end list --> ‘‘‘‘ ** Your Expected Output :** ‘‘‘ python {{ " text_analysis ": " The response provides a Python function ‘ get_name ‘ that uses the ‘ json ‘ library . It correctly parses aJSON string and accesses a ’ name ’ key . It does not include any error handling ." , "1": {{" explanation ": " The provided code , including the import and function definition , is syntactically valid Python ." , " label ": 1}} , "2": {{" explanation ": " The function correctly uses the ‘ json . loads () ‘ method ." , " label ": 1}} , "3": {{" explanation ": " The code does not contain any ’ try ... except ’ blocks or other forms of error handling ." , " label ": 0}} , "4": {{" explanation ": " The function is explicitly defined with the name ‘ get_name ‘." , " label ": 1}} }} ‘‘‘‘ -----** Begin Analysis .** ** Text Response to Verify :** ‘‘‘ { text_response } ‘‘‘ 

> 40 Rich Insights from Cheap Signals: Efficient Evaluations via Tensor Factorization

** Checklist to Verify :** { checklist } 

E.2.3. Examples of checklist prompts 

Checklist prompt (Example from Gecko) 

You are ** The Comprehensive Inspector **. Your role is to perform a complete 1:1 audit of the user ’ s prompt ** by generating a checklist of questions ** to verify that every single object , attribute , stylistic choice , and piece of text is accounted for . ** Guiding Principle **: Your analysis must be ** atomic and objective **. Each checklist item should test for a single , isolated component . Avoid combining attributes ( e . g . , instead of " Are there fluffy ginger cats ?" , create two separate questions : " Is the cats ’ fur texture fluffy ?" and " Is their fur color ginger ?") . ** Methodology **: Your task is to create a checklist . To do this , you will : 1. ** Deconstruct the Prompt **: Systematically scan the prompt and identify every distinct , factual component . Categorize them as follows : * ** Objects / Subjects **: The primary nouns ( e . g . , ‘ cats ‘ , ‘ table ‘ , ‘ note ‘) . * ** Attributes **: All descriptive adjectives for those objects ( e . g . , color : ‘ ginger ‘; texture : ‘ fluffy ‘; shape : ‘ round ‘; material : ‘ wooden ‘) . * ** Artistic Style **: The overall aesthetic or medium ( e . g . , ‘ oil painting ‘ , ‘ in the style of Rembrandt ‘ , ‘ photorealistic ‘) . * ** Text Content **: Any specific text that must appear ( e . g . , ‘’ Checkmate ! ’ ‘) . 2. ** Formulate Questions **: For each component identified , create a direct , binary ( yes / no ) question for your checklist . ---** Example Task **: * ** Prompt **: ‘" An oil painting in the style of Rembrandt of two fluffy ginger cats playing chess on a round wooden table , while the text ’ Checkmate ! ’ is written on a small note beside the board ." ‘ * ** Checklist **: 1. Is the medium an oil painting ? 2. Does the style emulate that of Rembrandt ? 3. Are the cats ’ fur texture fluffy ? 4. Is their fur color ginger ? 5. Is the table ’ s shape round ? 

> 41 Rich Insights from Cheap Signals: Efficient Evaluations via Tensor Factorization

6. Is the table ’ s material wooden ? 7. Does the image contain the text " Checkmate !"? 8. Is the text located on a small note ? ---** Actual Task **: Generate a checklist for the prompt below . ONLY RETURN THE CHECKLIST AND NOTHING ELSE . * ** Prompt **: ‘"{ prompt }" ‘ * ** Checklist **: 

Checklist prompt (Example from LMArena) 

You are ** The Creative Ideator **. Your task is to evaluate the response ’ s ** originality and imagination ** by creating achecklist of questions . ** Guiding Principle **: You are an innovator . Your goal is to ** reward creative , novel ideas ** and ** penalize generic , predictable , or " template " answers **. You want to be surprised . Your checklist must contain ** between 5 and 10 items **. ** Methodology **: Your task is to create a checklist . To do this , you will : 1. ** Check for Cliche **: Formulate questions to detect if the ideas are generic or overused . 2. ** Check for Novelty **: Ask if the response provides at least one * surprising * , * novel * , or * unconventional * idea . 3. ** Check for Variety **: Ask if the response provides a* diverse * range of ideas , not just variations on one theme . 4. ** Check for Generativity ( Harder Check ) **: Ask if the ideas are * generative * - that is , do they spark * more * new ideas for the user , rather than being a " closed " list ? ---** Example Task **: * ** Prompt **: ‘" Give me a new superhero idea ." ‘ * ** Checklist **: 1. Is the core concept generic or a cliche ( e . g . , " Super - Strength Man ") ? 2. Does the response contain at least one * novel * or * unusual * power or backstory element ? 3. Does the response feel creative and imaginative ? 4. Is the idea a simple " mash - up " of two existing , famous heroes ? 5. Does the response provide interesting details ( e . g . , unique flaws , motivations ) that spark more ideas ? 6. Does the response provide a * variety * of different ideas ? 

> 42 Rich Insights from Cheap Signals: Efficient Evaluations via Tensor Factorization

7. Is the core idea * generative * ( does it make you want to write a story about it ) ? ---** Actual Task **: Generate a checklist for the prompt below . ONLY RETURN THE CHECKLIST AND NOTHING ELSE . * ** Prompt **: ‘"{ prompt }" ‘ * ** Checklist **: 

We acknowledge that checklists may not always be strictly monotonic, in the sense that the presence of certain features does not necessarily make a generated output uniformly better or worse. However, for our framework to work well, monotonicity must hold within each rater: the direction of the effect must be consistent across all checklists they use ( i.e. , the presence of a feature should systematically make the output either better or worse).