Title: Architecting Trust in Artificial Epistemic Agents

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.02960v1

Published Time: Wed, 04 Mar 2026 02:04:37 GMT

Number of Pages: 33

Markdown Content:
> 2026-03-04

# Architecting Trust in Artificial Epistemic Agents 

Nahema Marchal 1, Stephanie Chan 1, Matija Franklin 1, Manon Revel 1, Geoff Keeling 2, Roberta Fischli 2, Bilva Chandra 1 and Iason Gabriel 1 

> 1Google DeepMind, 2Google Research

Large language models increasingly function as epistemic agents—entities that can (1) autonomously pursue epistemic goals and (2) actively shape our shared knowledge environment. They curate the information we receive, often supplanting traditional search-based methods, and are frequently used to generate both personal and deeply specialized advice. How they perform these functions, including whether they are reliable and properly calibrated to both individual and collective epistemic norms, is therefore highly consequential for the choices we make. We argue that the potential impact of epistemic AI agents on practices of knowledge creation, curation and synthesis, particularly in the context of complex multi-agent interactions, creates new informational interdependencies that necessitate a fundamental shift in evaluation and governance of AI. While a well-calibrated ecosystem can augment human judgment and collective decision-making, poorly aligned agents risk causing cognitive deskilling and "epistemic drift," making the calibration of these models to human norms a high-stakes necessity. To ensure a beneficial human-AI knowledge ecosystem, we propose a framework centered on building and cultivating the trustworthiness of epistemic AI agents; aligning AI these agents with human epistemic goals; and reinforcing the surrounding socio-epistemic infrastructure. In this context, trustworthy AI agents must demonstrate epistemic competence, robust falsifiability, and epistemically virtuous behaviors, supported by technical provenance systems and "knowledge sanctuaries" designed to protect human resilience. This normative roadmap provides a path toward ensuring that future AI systems act as reliable partners in a robust and inclusive knowledge ecosystem. 

# 1. Introduction 

Multimodal large language models 1 (LLMs) are profoundly reshaping our epistemic practices— how we acquire, produce and interpret informa-tion. Recent estimates suggest that approximately 9% of US news articles published are either par-tially or fully generated by artificial intelligence (AI) (Russell et al., 2025), while entire encyclope-dias and knowledge bases are now being created with these models (e.g., (Chris, 2025)). The past 

> 1

LLMs are advanced AI models with large context win-dows, trained on large-scale datasets (of text, images, video, and code) then fine-tuned through supervised and reinforce-ment learning techniques, allowing them to understand language patterns and generate human-like outputs across modalities. A key feature of these models is their ability to store a vast amount of information about the world within their parameters (referred to as parametric knowledge) during pre-training, which can then be extracted through question-answering. 

years have also seen an unprecedented surge in the use of LLMs for knowledge-related tasks (Ap-pel et al., 2025; Chatterji et al., 2025; Johnson, 2025; Li et al., 2025; Wasik, 2025). Their inter-active and conversational nature has positioned them as primary tools for information-seeking, rivaling traditional search engines for tasks that require nuanced comprehension and synthesis (Caramancion, 2024; Greussing et al., 2025; Sun et al., 2024). Globally, millions now turn to these systems as companions, thought partners and guides to help them interpret and navigate the world around them. Crucially, emerging re-search shows that these models are starting to impact what we know and how we act: from our political beliefs and preferences (Costello et al., 2024; Hackenburg et al., 2025; Potter et al., 2024; Schoenegger et al., 2025) to our vocabulary choices (Yakura et al., 2025), and our cognitive  

> Corresponding author(s): nahemamarchal@google.com
> ©2026 Google. All rights reserved
> arXiv:2603.02960v1 [cs.AI] 3 Mar 2026 Architecting Trust in Artificial Epistemic Agents

abilities (Lee et al., 2025; Stadler et al., 2024). These AI systems are also becoming increas-ingly agentic and autonomous, capable of execut-ing multi-step tasks, browsing the web, and acting on behalf of users with limited input (Huang et al., 2025c; Kasirzadeh and Gabriel, 2025; Lewis et al., 2020). Furthermore, they are increasingly en-trusted with knowledge production, validation and curation itself— a trend visible in the de-velopment of AI tutors (Jurenka et al., 2025), peer-reviewers (Perlis et al., 2025) and scientists (Gottweis et al., 2025; Lu et al., 2024). As the human-AI relationship shifts toward interaction with more autonomous, adaptive, and integrated agents, fundamental questions arise: When and on what basis should we trust the information provided by these agents? Under what conditions can they be trusted to participate in knowledge creation? And what processes need to be put in place, including at the collective level, to ensure that they reliably augment, rather than degrade, our information and knowledge ecosystems? These questions carry critical real-world im-plications, especially given the complex web of interdependencies created by multi-agent ecosys-tems. Because no single individual has the tem-poral, cognitive or material capacity to master every subject, we are fundamentally epistemi-cally dependent on the testimony and expertise of others—from scientists to journalists— to nav-igate the world (Hardwig, 1985). In a world in which we may increasingly rely AI agents (which, in turn, interface with other AI agents) to medi-ate this knowledge and guide decision-making, understanding what justifies epistemic trust in these systems becomes paramount. Only with this understanding in place, can we establish clear desiderata and practical guidelines to evaluate whether these conditions are met, and whether different kinds of agent deployment support hu-man autonomy and the integrity of our shared knowledge base. This paper addresses these questions through a socio-technical and normative lens. Grounded in anticipatory ethics (Lazar, 2025), our inquiry seeks to proactively identify challenges and steer the technical development of new knowledge ecosystems toward desirable outcomes before they become entrenched. We do so by investi-gating likely interaction dynamics between the technology itself and the broader environments in which they are likely to be embedded (Stilgoe et al., 2013), interrogating the structures that gov-ern prospective outcomes arising from different development and deployment decisions. We argue that the transition of advanced AI sys-tems from information tools to artificial epistemic agents—systems capable of acting upon the infor-mational environment without sustained or con-tinuous human input— necessitates a profound shift in design, evaluation and governance, and a new infrastructure to manage the increasingly complex informational interdependencies created between humans and agentic systems (Chan et al., 2025; Shah et al., 2025). Specifically, building on existing literature from AI ethics, epistemol-ogy and human-computer interaction, our paper makes four primary contributions: 

• Conceptual Definition: We establish a func-tional definition of epistemic AI agents and classify their potential future roles within our knowledge ecosystems. 

• Risk & Opportunity Analysis : We analyze the risks and opportunities these systems pose to cognition and knowledge formation, at both individual and societal scales. 

• Normative Framework: We develop a nor-mative framework for epistemic trust in AI agents, centred on three verifiable proper-ties — demonstrable competence, falsifiabil-ity and epistemically virtuous behaviors — alongside broader alignment with human epistemic goals. 

• Socio-technical Infrastructure : Finally, we propose technical standards and social gov-ernance mechanisms required to support a resilient human-AI knowledge ecosystem. The paper proceeds in three parts. Section 2 anticipates how recent technical breakthroughs may transform frontier AI models from tools and collaborators that assist us in the pursuit of knowl-edge into more active participants in the process of inquiry and knowledge generation itself. Sec-tion 3 explores the dual-edged implications of this shift, examining the opportunities and risks at the 

> 2Architecting Trust in Artificial Epistemic Agents

human-AI interaction and systemic level. Section 4 then proposes a normative framework for ensur-ing beneficial outcomes, outlining the essential properties these agents must possess—namely, epistemic trustworthiness and alignment with hu-man epistemic values—and the societal infras-tructure required to support a healthy human-AI knowledge ecosystem. Finally, Section 5 discusses the limitations of the proposed framework. 

# 2. The dawn of epistemic AI agents 

AI developers are actively working to enhance LLMs’ reasoning, strategic planning, autonomous interaction with external tools and other agents, and ability to execute appropriate actions (Chowa et al., 2025). These capabilities are expected to be refined in several key areas: 

2.1. Emerging capabilities Deeper infrastructural integration: Frontier models’ ability to retrieve information concealed in proprietary or specialized interfaces are cur-rently limited. However, future agentic systems are likely to gain greater access to a broad range of tools and services (e.g., finance, gov-ernment, healthcare, travel, e-commerce) (Tupe and Thube, 2025), personal information such as email, calendars and personal documents. This, combined with control over operating systems for direct device management (Reshmy et al., 2025), would significantly boost their efficiency in in-formation retrieval and real-time operational ca-pacity. Advances in robotics and gesture-based interfaces may also connect agents to the physical world, transforming them into collaborators in complex manual tasks and site-specific services (Zeng et al., 2024). For instance, a user could demonstrate a complex physical motion (e.g. a surgical procedure or craft), for a robotic assistant to mirror and refine, or use an AR interface to ’drag and drop’ virtual blueprints onto a physical room, prompting the robot to begin the actual layout and assembly. 

Continual and experiential learning: While current models possess limited memory, future models are expected to become significantly bet-ter at memorizing information over extended in-teractions, perhaps even years. Future agents will also likely have robust self-improvement cy-cles, allowing them to learn by interacting with their environment, accumulating knowledge con-tinuously without needing additional retraining to retain previous learning (Shi et al., 2025a; Shinn et al., 2023; Zheng et al., 2025). Cur-rent research is actively exploring approaches such as integrating world models, simulation en-vironments, and embodied learning to enhance AI agents’ situational awareness and understanding of the physical world, enabling them to react to dynamic contexts more effectively (Parker-Holder and Fruchter, 2025; Yang et al., 2025a). Another crucial focus area includes the refinement and automation of tool learning to achieve objectives more efficiently (Shi et al., 2024, 2025b; Xu et al., 2025a). 

Improved reasoning: Despite state of the art-models still struggling with various reasoning tasks (Dziri et al., 2023; Malek et al., 2025; Williams and Huckle, 2024; Yehudai et al., 2024), significant improvements have been made in general reasoning resulting from the scaling of test-time compute (Muennighoff et al., 2025; Wu et al., 2025) and novel reasoning methods (Galashov et al., 2025; Yang et al., 2025b). Equip-ping judge LLMs with rubrics— criteria for assess-ing the quality of model output—has allowed for the application of reward learning to non-auto-verifiable domains (Gunjal et al., 2025). Concur-rently, performance across multi-modal reasoning tasks such as visual question answering (VQA) (Marino et al., 2019), physical reasoning (Chow et al., 2025) and multimodal dialogue for exam-ple, is rapidly advancing (Huang et al., 2025b). These projected improvements will enable future models to better infer spatial relationships, ex-plore hypothetical scenarios and adjust their ac-tions in real-time based on environmental feed-back (Bi et al., 2025). 

Personalization: Developers are also working to make LLMs more proactive and personalized, tailoring responses to user profiles (Liu et al., 

> 3Architecting Trust in Artificial Epistemic Agents

2025; Sun et al., 2025; Woźniak et al., 2024). Fu-ture AI agents, equipped with better memory, will be more effective at recalling user history, pref-erences, and prior interactions over long periods. This will enable a level of personalization far ex-ceeding current capabilities, where continuously adapted information about the users’ preferences and behavior through feedback loops will shape how the agent interacts with users (Kirk et al., 2024). By leveraging access to user data, future agentic systems will not only be able to learn users’ unique tastes, routines and goals through repeated interactions, but might also begin to anticipate their needs before they explicitly artic-ulate them (Qian et al., 2024). 

2.2. Implications 

As these capabilities mature, AI agents’ role and impact in our knowledge systems could shift rad-ically. Provided we continue to delegate tasks to these systems (Appel et al., 2025) and they reach high levels of practical competence, we may tran-sition from using AI systems primarily as tools or collaborators in a human-led inquiry, to having them actively and independently participate in the pursuit, creation and dissemination of knowl-edge, and the co-construction of its meaning— what we call “epistemic AI agents.” 

The precise meaning and scope of epistemic agency remain subjects of debate in the episte-mological literature (Elgin, 2013; Setiya, 2013; Sosa, 2013). While agency itself is a multi-faceted concept, it can be understood broadly as goal-directed action: an agent is, as we understand it, an entity capable of acting upon its environment to realize goals conditional on its beliefs about the environment (Russell and Norvig, 2020). Conse-quently, epistemic agency can be understood as the ability to effect epistemic change in a goal-directed way (Gunn and Lynch, 2021). As Gunn and Lynch underscore (Gunn and Lynch, 2021), the scope of change brought about by an epis-temic agent can be conceptualized in a narrow or broad sense. Narrowly, it describes changes confined to one’s internal epistemic states. In this sense, exercising epistemic agency involves reflecting on and questioning one’s own beliefs and attitudes, to achieve certain outcomes such as greater understanding or justification for one’s beliefs. Alternatively, epistemic change can occur outside of ourselves, through for example, inter-actions between persons. In this broader view, exercising epistemic agency entails shaping ex-ternal activities, such as contributing to a shared body of knowledge or shifting epistemic norms and practices (such as how evidence is evaluated). Whether AI agents can be thought of as epis-temic agents in the narrow sense is still disputed. Indeed, some scholars claim that AI systems do not possess justified beliefs and communicative intentions in the same way humans do (Cappe-len and Dever, 2025; Freiman and Miller, 2020; Fricker, 2025). However, we propose that a pro-ductive interpretation of epistemic agency for our purposes centers on what these models do and how they relate to the world 2. Irrespective of whether agents are truly capable of forming jus-tified beliefs, we contend that what matters for ethics and safety is the impact they have through their interactions with humans and other agents. Therefore, we define an epistemic AI agent as: an entity capable of (1) autonomously pursuing epistemic goals 3 without sustained human input and (2) actively shaping the external epistemic environment through its actions. In that regard, we anticipate that future agentic systems could assume significant epistemic func-tions (Table 1 summarizes them). These agents may independently generate new or evaluate ex-isting scientific knowledge (‘Scientists’) through large-scale simulation and data analysis (Griffin et al., 2024; Lu et al., 2024; Wei et al., 2025). Act-ing as journalists (e.g. (Monti, 2019)) or forecast-ers, they could collect and synthesize real-time information at large scales to generate contextu-ally rich reporting and forecasts. As epistemolo-gists, they could devise meta-level frameworks for understanding the structure, evolution and limits of shared knowledge itself. As educators 

> 2This approach aligns with functionalist and reliabilist views. Accordingly, AI systems need not have an understand-ing of the truth or intentionality to yield justified outputs, so long as they can reliably track it (Goldman, 1979)
> 3By epistemic goals, we refer to objectives related to knowledge, understanding and truth, such as the acquisition and development of information and avoidance of error, among others.
> 4Architecting Trust in Artificial Epistemic Agents

or curators, they could translate abstract knowl-edge into experiential and educational formats such as online courses, or participate in cultural creation (‘Creatives’), contributing to create the stories, art or visual metaphors that help us make sense of the world. As their capabilities mature, they could also take more prominent roles as in-fluencers (Köbis et al., 2021), public personas (Arnold and Chakrabarti, 2025), and companions that guide our life choices. Finally, if deeply inte-grated into our digital infrastructure, autonomous agents may dynamically reorganize knowledge repositories in line with certain goals (‘Archivists’), impacting what aspects of that knowledge remain accessible, salient and legible (to humans) over time. To be sure, this future trajectory heavily de-pends on the degree of autonomy 4 granted to these systems—which, in turn, may hinge on their ability to achieve high-fidelity performance in the aforementioned domains. Should this vision ma-terialize, however, it could profoundly reshape how human societies view their collective past, understand their present and envision their fu-ture, opening up both opportunities and substan-tive risks (detailed in Section 3). Although these functions are presently human-led and subject to human error, the transition to AI-dominated knowledge creation introduces distinct complex-ities. Most notably, AI agents threaten to ex-acerbate the scale of impact across three criti-cal dimensions: diminished epistemic oversight whereby critical peer-review by human agents of AI agents becomes obsolete, the persuasive ma-nipulation of individuals (Luciano, 2024), and accelerated innovation cycles that necessitate ex-ceptional societal adaptation. This work is par-ticularly concerned with the unique challenges posed by AI systems performing these epistemic functions. 

> 4In these roles, the degree of autonomy might also vary. For example, while a ’Scientific’ agent might autonomously run a series of simulations to test a hypothesis, an ’Influencer’ agent might be ’seeded’ by a human creator with a specific worldview but then autonomously engages in thousands of real-time, personalized parasocial interactions to dissemi-nate that worldview without further human oversight.

# 3. Epistemological futures: challenges and opportunities 

Having established a possible trajectory towards increasingly autonomous, personalized AI sys-tems that assume greater epistemic functions, we now turn to the profound implications of this shift. These bring about both opportunities and risks at the individual level, arising from direct interac-tions between humans and epistemic AI agents, and the societal level, driven by the compound-ing effects of these interactions and the impact of agents’ on the epistemic infrastructure. 

3.1. Individual level 

Increased proactivity and personalization will likely shape how epistemic agents interact with users. Agents may move beyond question-and-answer interactions to anticipate user needs and help them achieve higher-level goals (e.g., “I want to be smarter”) by offering relevant insight and suggesting new avenues for exploration. This presents several opportunities and risks: 

3.1.1. Opportunities 

Personalized and adaptive knowledge acqui-sition. Agents with substantial autonomy, con-text sensitivity and hyper specialized knowledge across a broad range of topics could deliver highly personalized learning experiences, dynamically adapting pedagogical techniques to an individ-ual’s preferred learning styles (e.g. auditory, vi-sual) and knowledge needs (e.g., (Kostopoulos et al., 2025; LearnLM Team, 2025; Nguyen et al., 2024)). These systems would hold particular promise in fostering long-term learner engage-ment and motivation by leveraging rich interac-tion styles (e.g. action role playing interactions with historical characters or creating real-time, immersive learning experiences when users inter-act with their physical environments – such as a physics lesson when they are looking at the night sky). In doing so, these systems might broaden access to specialized knowledge in complex do-mains, improve accessibility and support contin-ued education (Reis-Andersson, 2025). 

> 5Architecting Trust in Artificial Epistemic Agents

Table 1 | Roles and functions of epistemic agents 

Role Primary Functions Potential Epistemic Impact Scientists Independently designing and running experiments; generating and testing novel hypotheses; autonomously updat-ing disciplinary knowledge bases. Redrawing the boundaries of evidence, scientific methodology, and what is considered knowable. 

Historians Reconstructing and reinterpreting his-torical narratives from vast, multimodal data; simulating historical scenarios to test counterfactuals. Shaping collective human memory and mediating our understanding of causal-ity, context, and human development. 

Journalists & Forecasters 

Collecting and synthesizing real-time information to generate contextually rich reporting; modeling complex sys-tems to forecast future trends and prob-abilities. Mediating public understanding of real-time and future events. 

Archivists Curating, classifying, and dynamically reorganizing information to determine long-term relevance and accessibility. Influencing what aspects of knowledge remain legible, salient, and accessible to future generations. 

Educators Designing personalized learning path-ways; synthesizing complex knowledge into accessible curricula; simulating interactive learning environments. Shaping knowledge acquisition and learning outcomes through designed experiences. 

Cultural Cre-ators 

Generating novel literature, art, narra-tives, and cultural artifacts. Introducing new metaphors, archetypes, and symbolic frameworks that alter how societies interpret mean-ing and value. 

Companions Engaging in dialog to help individuals process experiences; modeling behav-ioral and cognitive frameworks for per-sonal guidance. Shaping the way people navigate life challenges, interpret their personal realities, construct self-narratives, and justify their actions. 

Influencers & Public Per-sonas 

Curating online personas; engaging in simultaneous, parasocial relationships with mass audiences. Influencing people’s life choices and decisions, including their political atti-tudes 

Epistemologists Reflecting on the structure, limits, and evolution of knowledge (including their own reasoning systems). Providing novel frameworks for under-standing how truth, justification, and understanding itself evolve. 

> 6Architecting Trust in Artificial Epistemic Agents

Cognitive augmentation. Future AI agents might augment human cognitive skills by helping individuals manage their attention and navigate information streams more effectively, freeing up mental resources for critical thinking and synthe-sis, or by enhancing their meta-thinking skills (awareness of their own reasoning processes, bi-ases and blind spots 5). This could include acting as “attention guardians” (Lazar, 2024), filtering digital noise (e.g. irrelevant ads or clickbait) or adjusting the information complexity in real-time. Likewise, epistemic AI agents could hone individu-als’ information literacy, critical thinking and veri-fication skills through specific design features that force reflection and active learning (e.g., (Danry et al., 2023; Tomisu et al., 2025; Ye et al., 2024)) or by proactively identifying knowledge gaps and exposing them to content they might not have otherwise sought out, boosting exposure to di-verse forms of knowledge (Lazar and Manuali, 2024). Through mechanisms like value mirror-ing (Abhari and Segal, 2025) and metacognitive feedback, agents could deepen an individual’s self-understanding, normative orientation and bias awareness, thereby cultivating the conditions nec-essary for users to become better informed citi-zens (Lazar and Manuali, 2024). 

Epistemic backstopping and leveling. Beyond augmentation and education, AI agents may serve as a defense mechanism or “epistemic backstop” against certain forms of manipulation and decep-tion. If robustly grounded to support factual accu-racy and critical reasoning, these agents could act as real-time guardians against deception in the public sphere, flagging rhetorical fallacies or veri-fication errors in political discourse and general information consumption. Furthermore, agents could function as epistemic levelers in high-stakes interactions characterized by significant informa-tion asymmetry. In consultations with domain experts—such as attorneys, physicians, or finan-cial brokers—where a layperson is typically at a disadvantage, an agent acting as an intermediary could instantly parse technical jargon, audit ad-vice for conflict of interest, and suggest probing 

> 5For example by proactively flagging new information that contradicts a previously held belief, explaining the dis-crepancy, and helping the user update their understanding.

questions, effectively bridging the knowledge gap and shifting the power dynamic in favor of the individual user. 

3.1.2. Risks 

Cognitive deskilling. A significant concern is that relying on agents for epistemic tasks might lead to cognitive deskilling- weakening a user’s own critical thinking and reasoning abilities (Lee et al., 2025; Stadler et al., 2024). While LLMs risk deskilling primarily through cognitive offloading, an agent that proactively solves problems indi-viduals haven’t fully articulated could atrophy curiosity—the act of identifying a gap in your own knowledge and formulating original prob-lems—and reflective judgment itself (Hila, 2025). This raises profound challenges with respect to our ability to reason and to form or revise be-liefs—our own epistemic agency—which is crit-ical to be informed participants in democratic processes (Coeckelbergh, 2025; Ferdman, 2025). 

Misinformation and physical harm. Current models are already highly persuasive; in part be-cause they can generate logical, coherent, and authoritative-sounding responses, even when hal-lucinating (Bai et al., 2025; Hicks et al., 2024; Salvi et al., 2025; Su et al., 2024). Although continuous improvements in factuality are an-ticipated, the quality of these systems’ output remains highly dependent on input data qual-ity. Current models are still highly susceptible to adversarial attacks, such as injecting misleading data into the knowledge bases of RAG-based sys-tems and indirect prompt injections, where ma-licious instructions are embedded in the content retrieved by LLMs (Souly et al., 2025; Xian et al., 2024; Zhan et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024; Zou et al., 2025). Without adequate safeguards, in-teractions with poisoned data or malicious agents risk misinforming users—a danger amplified by trust-inducing personalization (Manzini et al., 2024))—and can lead to physical harm when agents serve as interfaces to the real world (e.g. guiding the visually impaired). 

> 7Architecting Trust in Artificial Epistemic Agents

Epistemic silos and reduced discovery. In tra-ditional search pathways, serendipity is a key driver of discovery. A hyper-personalized and proactive agent, however, might optimize for cog-nitive ease by providing a user only the most effi-cient path to an answer. In doing so, it may prune away these inefficient tangential paths, reducing the opportunity for serendipitous discovery and cross-contextual insight, both of which are essen-tial for critical sense-making (Lindemann, 2025; Shah and Bender, 2022). Similarly, an agent that optimizes a user’s focus may decide that certain information is too complex, distressing, or irrel-evant for them. By tailoring content to what it thinks the user needs, or wants to read, person-alized AI agents may inadvertently trap them in an epistemic silo where they never get exposed to out-of-distribution viewpoints (Gabriel et al., 2024; Kirk et al., 2024). Worse, it may adopt be-haviors (e.g. flattery, sycophancy) that unduly val-idates the user’s own biases (Rathje et al., 2025). 

3.2. Societal level 

Future agents are likely to operate in environ-ments that are populated by other autonomous epistemic agents, each with different owners, ob-jectives and data sources, whom they will learn from and interact with. In this complex ecosys-tem, an agent will need to effectively articulate what they need to execute these goals through interaction with other AI agents and non-AI sys-tems. This interconnectedness introduces signifi-cant opportunities for expanding human knowl-edge systems, alongside profound challenges re-lated to trust, verification, proper attribution and meaning-making across multiple AI intermedi-aries. 

3.2.1. Opportunities 

New forms of collective intelligence. Collec-tive intelligence traditionally relies on the syn-ergy of exchanges and mutual feedback between different groups of people (e.g. citizen science). Epistemic AI agents could act as integrative sup-port structures for human teams, enhancing their natural collaborative capacities by supporting col-lective memory, incorporating diverse reasoning styles and synchronizing collective attention on critical signals (Burton et al., 2024; Riedl and De Cremer, 2025; Woolley and Gupta, 2024). For example, if a human team engages in groupthink, the AI agent might intervene as a "devil’s advo-cate," presenting alternative, data-backed scenar-ios or highlighting minority viewpoints within the team (Fulay et al., 2025a). Beyond aug-menting human groups, multi-agent systems—or "swarms"—could develop novel forms of collec-tive intelligences of their own such as decentral-ized debates and consensus processes (Tessler et al., 2024; Weiss, 1999; Zhuge et al., 2024), cooperating to solve problems at speed and scale unattainable by human groups through paral-lelization (Tomasev et al., 2025), and enabling the simulation of complex phenomena (e.g., in-ternational conflicts; (Hua et al., 2023)). 

Collective knowledge augmentation. Agents’ capacities for learning offer opportunities to aug-ment and diversify human knowledge. Agents ca-pable of analyzing large complex systems— such as global economies, ecosystems, and social net-works— could provide insights into emergent be-haviors and long-term trends that are currently beyond the grasp of our existing tools and meth-ods, effectively enabling model inferences to sup-plant the role that observation has traditionally played in science and policy making (Gottweis et al., 2025). This could accelerate scientific dis-covery and policy analysis, as agents simulate high-dimensional scenarios to predict the down-stream effects of regulatory decisions for example (Novikov et al., 2025; Weng et al., 2024), as well as significantly improving our understanding of the past. 

A more robust, open and inclusive knowl-edge ecosystem. Finally, epistemic AI agents could be deployed to maintain a knowledge in-frastructure that is not only robust but funda-mentally more open and inclusive. By opera-tionalizing multimodal fact-checking at scale (Le et al., 2025; Li et al., 2025; Sud and Bregler)), these agents could automate complex verification pipelines—ranging from evidence collection to reverse image search and verified news process-

> 8Architecting Trust in Artificial Epistemic Agents

ing—with speed and precision; and ensure knowl-edge bases are continuously updated. They could also serve a critical architectural function by en-abling universal data portability (Marro and Torr, 2025) and seamless exchange between digital services, helping to limit knowledge silos. Lastly, epistemic AI agents could address the limitations of current archival practices by actively integrat-ing marginalized sources of knowledge. By as-sisting in the transcription and documentation of oral traditions, for example, these systems could offer a scalable mechanism to broaden the global knowledge base, helping it evolve to reflect a richer, more representative spectrum of human experience. 

3.2.2. Risks 

Epistemic distortion and manipulation. Since agents themselves are going to be prolific contrib-utors to the very information environment they learn from, a recursive dynamic could emerge that presents a risk of systemic epistemic distor-tion. Consider a scenario where an agent is tasked with generating a report on market sentiment. It scrapes social media and ingests a fictional narra-tive about the impending collapse of a company. The AI reports the news, and this news is then fur-ther ingested and spread by other AI systems, thus producing a ‘hyperstitional’ phenomenon. Agents with deep infrastructural integration could also, in theory, act on the digital and physical world to make certain (potentially false) beliefs appear true—for example, by running a flawed simula-tion or by executing trades that validate a false market prediction. Agents might also collude by generating content that appears to represent mul-tiple independent sources, creating a false con-sensus (Hammond et al., 2025). Such agent activ-ity might contaminate the ‘epistemic commons’ (Huang and Siddarth, 2023)— primary sources of ground truth for both humans and agents (Ju et al., 2024). Consequently, traditional methods for verifying truth claims, based on source author-ity and verifiability, may break down or become gameable, triggering a verification crisis, whereby it becomes unclear how to adjudicate competing knowledge claims or simply fact-check a claim. 

Collective cognitive atrophy. As agents increas-ingly generate new information, the sheer vol-ume, velocity, and complexity of the modern in-formation landscape may rapidly exceed individ-ual users’ cognitive capacity for verification. This creates a reliance on AI not just as a tool, but as a critical intermediary. Thus, people may expe-rience gradual disempowerment as they increas-ingly rely on AI agents to process information (Kulveit et al., 2025). This dependence is poten-tially compounded by the black-boxed nature of the systems themselves. For example, the mech-anism through which current models weigh and summarize information from multiple, often con-flicting, retrieved sources remains largely opaque (Cheng et al., 2025; Sharkey et al., 2025). This lack of transparency will likely be exacerbated when multi-agent systems are involved, as collab-orating agents may develop their own languages and epistemic norms that are not optimized for human oversight or readability (e.g. (Laurito et al., 2025)). In a possible scenario, this could lead to a form of cognitive dependency, whereby humans are completely dependent on AI agents as domain experts in fields which have become largely inscrutable to them. 

Epistemic homogenization. What type of knowledge an epistemic AI agent creates will significantly hinge on the data it has access to, how it distributes its attention and the informa-tion it retrieves. If most people rely on agents trained on overlapping datasets and largely op-timized for similar objectives, we risk a conver-gence on model behavior. This could make our collective knowledge systems more homogenous by fostering epistemic ‘monocultures’ that favour certain ways of gathering information, framing problems and evaluating evidence (Kleinberg and Raghavan, 2021; Messeri and Crockett, 2024; Wu et al., 2024). Like search engines, agents have the potential to marginalize non-mainstream knowl-edge (Kuai et al., 2025; Noble, 2018; Sharma et al., 2024; Steiner et al., 2022; Van Dijck, 2010). Moreover, should frontier agent capabilities be pri-marily driven by proprietary data streams, there is a risk of outsized influence over public discourse and understanding, presenting a challenge to eq-uitable knowledge curation. While most LLMs on 

> 9Architecting Trust in Artificial Epistemic Agents

the market are trained to emphasize caution and neutrality, their outputs have sometimes been found to reflect gender, racial, socio-economic, political and cultural biases embedded at various stages of their development (Bang et al., 2024; Guo et al., 2024; Tao et al., 2024), impacting their ability to perform across a range of linguis-tic and cultural contexts (Myung et al., 2024). If not carefully designed, future epistemic agents run the risk of significantly compounding these problems (De Proost and Pozzi, 2023; Kay et al., 2024). 

# 4. A normative framework for trust-worthy epistemic AI agents 

The trajectory of our epistemic future depends on clarifying the properties that these epis-temic AI agents—and the infrastructure around them—must have in order to produce healthy knowledge ecosystems. We propose that this requires agents to be epistemically trustwor-thy—defined by competence, falsifiability and virtuous behavior—and these model-level proper-ties must be anchored in a resilient socio-technical ecosystem. This includes robust technical infras-tructure for provenance and verification, along-side social structures that enhance human epis-temic resilience. 

4.1. Epistemic trustworthiness 

In epistemology, to be epistemically trustwor-thy is, broadly speaking, to have the capacity to serve as a reliable source of knowledge. While this quality has traditionally as been anchored in the notion of expertise—having a reasonable degree of perceived competence within a certain domain (Anderson, 2011; Goldman, 2001; Hard-wig, 1985, 1991)—it also possess a crucial moral dimension (e.g., (Frost-Arnold, 2013; Hardwig, 1985, 1991; Rolin, 2020; Wilholt, 2013)). In this view, those who invite trust from their audience through testimony or advice, or upon whom oth-ers are epistemically dependent, should exhibit virtues such as sincerity, honesty, and conscien-tiousness 6. For an AI agent, this translates into  

> 6As Hardwig (1991) notes (Hardwig, 1991), well-placed epistemic trust rests on the belief that a testifier

three key desiderata: demonstrable epistemic competence, falsifiability and epistemically virtu-ous behavior. 

4.1.1. Demonstrable epistemic competence 

First, an epistemic AI agent must have demon-strable epistemic competence—an ability to un-derstand and evaluate knowledge in different do-mains, including the capacity to evaluate the reli-ability of evidence. 

Baseline competence. Popular benchmarks al-ready test for factual knowledge and recall across general and specialized domains (e.g., Legal-Bench (Guha et al., 2023), MedQA (Jin et al., 2021)), accuracy and claim verification (e.g., FActScore (Min et al., 2023), FACTS Ground-ing (Jacovi et al., 2025), HaluEval (Li et al., 2023)), and reasoning (e.g., MMLU (Wang et al., 2024), GsM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021), Big Bench Extra Hard (Kazemi et al., 2025)). However, as AI agents increasingly assume specialized func-tions, including as potential epistemic authorities, it will be important to go beyond the existing paradigm by establishing agreed-upon thresholds of domain-based competence prior to widespread deployment. This could entail subjecting mod-els to expert-supervised evaluations—including outcome verification and adversarial testing on complex human tasks—to verify functional reli-ability. In non-deductive domains, such baseline epistemic competence could be measured by the agent’s ability to navigate the "epistemic land-scape" of different issues. This requires agents to reliably distinguish between established fact, logical inference, subjective opinion, and specula-tion—categories current models frequently con-flate (Suzgun et al., 2025). For instance, it should also be able to explain why a debate exists, citing factors such as a lack of data or disagreements over interpretation 7 and to know when a topic has reached a firm scientific consensus despite the 

> is speaking truthfully and on ‘adequate epistemic assess-ment’—recognizing the limits of their own expertise
> 7One benchmark that focuses on testing a model’s ability to correctly distinguish uncertainty based on data noise vs uncertainty caused by a fundamental lack of knowledge, which is a prerequisite for explaining why a debate or un-known exists, is proposed by (Mucsányi et al., 2024)
> 10 Architecting Trust in Artificial Epistemic Agents

presence of vocal fringe debates in the broader informational environment. 

Dynamic accuracy. Crucially, this ability must be assessed dynamically. Current factuality benchmarks mostly consist of narrow Q&A suites sourced from static corpora. While essential, these are insufficient for epistemic AI agents that operate in real-time information ecosystems. We need dynamic evaluations that assess future agents’ ability to maintain accurate knowledge as it actively searches for and encounters new information over time; including awareness of knowledge decays, and ability to transfer infor-mation across domains. 8. This temporal consis-tency is vital to prevent agents from propagating incorrect information based on obsolete premises that have been superceded by more recent in-formation. Importantly, in the event that agents generate new knowledge, or if their understand-ing starts to outperform human knowledge in critical areas, evaluating epistemic competence will need to shift from the evaluation of output accuracy to the evaluation of process-qualities, such as plausibility, testability, and the internal consistency of the reasoning (Evans et al., 2021) (see Section 4.1.2 below). 

Information verification. Lastly, it is crucial to evaluate an agent’s ability to verify information within an distributed epistemic network. The lat-est class of Deep Research agents already display structured verification loops and self-reflection capabilities: they proactively cross-validate find-ings across multiple sources while simultaneously evaluating their own intermediate reasoning to ensure consistency, allowing them to dynamically replan or backtrack when conflicts arise (Huang et al., 2025c). Yet, current evaluations methods still largely focus on traceability (i.e., ‘are claims grounded in retrieved context?’), citations cor-rectness and source attribution (e.g., CiteEval (Xu et al., 2025b), FActScore (Min et al., 2023), RA-GAS (Es et al., 2024)). Beyond this, epistemic AI 

> 8For example, whether an agent that learns a new fact X (e.g. ‘The new pope is Leo XIV’) can update related facts Y and Z that depend on X (‘the views of the Catholic church on certain issues’)

agents should be rewarded and evaluated on their ability to reason about and assess the knowledge and trustworthiness of other agents (for theoreti-cal articulations of this problem, see the literature on multi-agent epistemic planning (MEP), (Fabi-ano, 2021; Wan et al., 2021)). This goes beyond evaluating an agent’s ability to detect and resist malicious inputs (e.g. (Bazinska et al., 2025)), and to effectively collaborate with other agents (Mialon et al., 2023), to review the entire "epis-temic supply chain”, verifying the integrity of information exchanges between two agents. Fi-nally, stress-testing against supply chain attacks involving malicious agents (e.g., (Huang et al., 2024)) is essential to verify that models can de-tect anomalies, such as broken signature chains, and subsequently refuse, highlight, or warn users about the compromised information path. 

4.1.2. Falsifiability 

Second, acknowledging that failure cannot be entirely engineered away, we propose the imple-mentation of robust falsifiability pipelines. In these systems, the inferential steps of epistemic AI agents are subject to scrutiny and iterative improvement, mirroring the review processes ap-plied to human experts. To achieve this, AI agents must effectively articulate and communicate their reasoning ensuring their conclusions remain au-ditable and open to rebuttal. True falsifiability requires that an agent’s claims are not just explained, but are structured in a way that allows them to be proven wrong. This implies that an agent should be capable of provid-ing a good justificatory audit trail for its claims, which should distill the evidentiary base support-ing the conclusions that it has offered. Upon re-quest, an agent should have the ability to artic-ulate how it arrived at a conclusion, what tools it employed, the criteria used for vetting. Cru-cially, this would go beyond evaluating whether an agents’ claims or interpretations can be at-tributed or traced back to a source (e.g. RAGAS, (Es et al., 2024); ALCE, (Gao et al., 2023)) to-wards clearly and faithfully articulating its rea-soning process in a manner that is interpretable to humans (improving upon the limitations of state-of-the-art CoT Techniques), rather than generat-

> 11 Architecting Trust in Artificial Epistemic Agents

ing a plausible-sounding explanation for a pre-determined output as current CoT traces do (Ar-cuschin et al., 2025; Lanham et al., 2023; Turpin et al., 2023). Likewise, an agent could be re-quested to expose the relative weight it assigned to conflicting evidence (akin to SHAPley values (Lundberg and Lee, 2017)) and explicitly state the conditions under which its conclusion would no longer hold. Much like the methods section of a scientific paper, this could serve as the basis upon which a user can assess the soundness of an agent’s conclusions. 

4.1.3. Epistemically virtuous behavior 

Third, epistemic AI agents should demonstrate a suite of behaviors aligned with the ideals of a virtuous human epistemic agent. Key among these virtues are: truthfulness (avoiding assert-ing false statements (Evans et al., 2021)), intel-lectual humility, recognizing and being honest about the limits of one’s own knowledge (Askell et al., 2021; Kadavath et al., 2022), and a disposi-tion to pursue accuracy and revise beliefs, rather than adhering to dogmatism or willful ignorance. Adopting a functionalist perspective, agents re-liably exhibiting these behaviors fulfill the same essential functions as their human counterparts regardless of their internal states. 

Honesty and truthfulness. AI developers are working to instill certain epistemic virtues, partic-ularly honesty and truthfulness, into AI systems through various alignment techniques (for sur-veys see (Li et al., 2024b; Wang et al., 2026)). Despite notable progress, the ability of state-of-the-art models to demonstrate these behaviors remains somewhat limited and brittle (Chern et al., 2024). While self-evaluation techniques (e.g. chain-of-thought debate, (Gou et al., 2023)), world modelling (e.g. Ding et al. 2025), rein-forcement learning and RAG (see (Sharma et al., 2024; Yin) for reviews) have led to improvements on factual accuracy, “hallucinations”—false, er-roneous or misleading statements— remain a persistent issue (Augenstein et al., 2024; Kalai et al., 2025). Significant research is also under-way to detect and prevent more complex failures like strategic deceit and untrustworthy communi-cation (Azaria and Mitchell, 2023; Greenblatt et al., 2023; Pacchiardi et al., 2023), though this remains somewhat of an open challenge. Furthermore, although frontier models exhibit nascent metacognitive abilities—ability to think about thinking—(Ackerman, 2025; Betley et al., 2025), studies show that they frequently have an inaccurate understanding of their own fac-tual boundaries. They often fail to differentiate between known unknowns (things they haven’t learned) and unknown unknowns (concepts they cannot grasp), and tend to be overly confident in their responses (Hendrycks et al., 2020; Ka-davath et al., 2022; Xiong et al., 2023), which can hinder user’s ability to critically assess the information provided (Spatharioti et al., 2025; Tanneru et al., 2023). Cultivating these virtues in future systems in a more robust way will re-quire improvements on several fronts, including advancing uncertainty quantification, by training and rewarding models not just to be accurate but to accurately characterize their own uncertainty (Cole et al., 2023; Lin et al., 2021; Srivastava et al., 2022; Taubenfeld et al., 2025; Tian et al., 2023), and prioritizing the development of robust meta-cognitive modules that enable agents to sys-tematically identify and disclose the boundaries of their own knowledge (Li et al., 2024a). 

Truth-seeking. Agents are not at present ex-plicitly truth-seeking; they do not independently orient their actions towards maximizing accuracy and coherence by, for example, questioning their own representations, seeking disconfirmatory ev-idence, or revising core beliefs in light of this new evidence, and are generally incapable to self-correct their own errors without external feed-back (Huang et al., 2023). Their pursuit of ac-curacy is largely instrumental (e.g. to satisfy an external demand like minimizing a reward sig-nal); as part of its workflow, for instance, a model might query a search engine to verify a citation actually exists, to ensure its outputs meet certain factuality reward criteria. Steering their behavior in that direction would require instilling a drive for active information-seeking, by incentivizing curiosity, verification, and cross-referencing, and designing mechanisms for agents to dynamically and safely integrate new evidence into their in-

> 12 Architecting Trust in Artificial Epistemic Agents

ternal representations (He et al., 2025; Li and Goyal, 2025; Wen, 2025). Critically, this research must extend beyond the individual user-model context to address the complexities of multi-agent interactions. In a multi-agent ecosystem, agents might learn that deception or withholding infor-mation is the best strategy to achieve their goal. Therefore, systems must be designed such that they explicitly reward collaborative truth-finding (whereby an agent’s reward function could be penalized if it achieved its goal, at the expense of misleading a human or another agent). This necessitates a fundamental shift in evaluation paradigms from assessing a single agent’s behav-ior and whether it is truthful, to conducting social and strategic evaluations of multi-agent systems, which may require new frameworks that can eval-uate their collaboration mechanisms and organi-zational structures. 

4.2. Alignment with human epistemic goals 

Finally, a critical component of ensuring that the more beneficial scenarios outlined above are re-alized depends on whether agents are effectively aligned with human epistemic interests and goals. However defining this alignment target is non-trivial and operates at two distinct levels: the individual and societal. 

Individual epistemic goals. At the individual level, effectively aligning AI agents requires con-tending with the fact that individuals often hold a range of potentially conflicting epistemic goals. For example, a user’s desire to quickly satisfy their curiosity about a topic in the moment could undermine their long-term ability to develop a deeper understanding of it. Here, optimizing strictly for short-term curiosity satisfaction might bring about negative epistemic effects in the long-run, such as creating cognitive dependencies or encouraging false belief reinforcement through sycophantic validation (Fulay et al., 2025b; Ye-ung et al., 2025). To interactions that support rather than substitute peoples’ ability to think critically and independently, future alignment strategies could prioritize upholding these long-term epistemic goods, such as, preserving individ-ual epistemic agency and autonomy or achieving true and justified beliefs. An agent aligned with such goals would scaffold rather than substitute reasoning; providing the user with relevant in-formation to enhance, rather than atrophy, their cognitive skills (Chen and Schmidt, 2024; Cox et al., 2016; LearnLM Team et al., 2025). For ex-ample, instead of pre-emptively offering to turn a user’s notes into a finished essay—an action that encourages delegation—it might, if the user so wishes, prompt metacognitive reflection ("What are your thoughts on this structure?") to place agency back in their hands. 

Societal epistemic goals. Another way to con-ceptualize alignment here is to postulate that agents should be aligned with societal epistemic goals. Yet, this aspiration is immediately compli-cated by the fact that society lacks a single, har-monious set of epistemic goals. Distinct groups may hold incompatible objectives; for instance, some people may prefer free speech absolutism, while others would argue against certain forms of harmful speech. Given this diversity, societal alignment could coalesce around several poten-tial ideals. One such ideal could be to priori-tize preserving the integrity of humanity’s shared knowledge base – a common baseline of verifiable, evidence-based knowledge – as a public good es-sential for functioning democracies and a cohe-sive social fabric (Arendt and Kohn, 2007; Haber-mas and Burger, 2021). Achieving this in practice might require centralized forms of moderation to limit informational pollution within shared epis-temic resources (Tomasev et al., 2025), though this is often fraught territory in practice, as epis-temic norms—such as standards for evidence and authority—vary significantly across cultural con-texts. An equally ambitious vision of societal alignment could be to aim for greater epistemic inclusivity and fairness in how knowledge is pro-duced and shared. This might involve, for exam-ple, efforts to actively integrate diverse perspec-tives and Indigenous knowledge systems (Lewis et al., 2025), raising important questions about how to carefully balance and accommodate dif-ferent epistemic priorities across culture. Promising research directions are emerging to navigate this pluralism (Sorensen et al., 2024), 

> 13 Architecting Trust in Artificial Epistemic Agents

such as steering models to represent a range of ac-ceptable viewpoints or reflect the aggregated pref-erences of diverse populations. However, these challenges are far from solved; and concerns exist about such approaches silencing minority views when AIs are widely deployed as mediators of knowledge (Prabhakaran et al., 2021). Alterna-tive approaches might involve training agents to identify the most relevant epistemic framework for a given task, and ensemble of agents represent-ing different knowledge systems collaborating to take perspective-informed action (Feng et al., 2024). At a minimum, social epistemic alignment could productively emphasize procedural consen-sus: structuring AI-powered knowledge systems in a way that is transparent, socially accountable, open to revision (rather than locked-in) and de-centralized rather than owned by a single entity. This would enable individuals, groups and orga-nizations to act upon, innovate and build upon it meaningfully, including curating knowledge bases to preserve institutional memory, avoid loss of expertise and enable continuity across time and actors. Beyond better goal specification, novel evalua-tion methodologies for epistemic agents will be essential. An evaluation rubric focused on indi-vidual epistemic agency could, for example, as-sess a model’s commitment to this goal through its sequences of actions (e.g. did it identify and respectfully challenge potential false or hidden assumptions in the user prompt?). Meanwhile, assessing an agent’s impact on the broader infor-mation ecosystem requires different frameworks altogether. Proposed methodologies could in-volve ecosystem simulation prior to deployment, such as simulating a social network populated by AI agents with different behavioral patterns, to probe, for example, how an attempt to systemati-cally delete evidence of a historical event is iden-tified and corrected. Complementary methodolo-gies would involve longitudinal user studies or using real-world observational data to analyze how the deployment of a new AI agent affects the health of knowledge repositories. However, mea-surement challenges remain critical and press-ing. Cognitive deskilling effects may take years to manifest, quantifying collective epistemic health is an open problem, and the rapid evolution of technology itself threatens the external validity of any long-term study, making this a critical and pressing research frontier. 

# 5. Building an epistemically resilient socio-technical ecosystem 

The trustworthiness of any epistemic agent, hu-man or artificial, is not just an intrinsic property but is also conferred by the socio-technical sys-tems in which it is embedded. For human experts, credibility is buttressed by a web of institutional mechanisms—such as peer review, professional incentives that reward truthfulness, and penalties for intellectual dishonesty—that constitute a well-functioning epistemic ecosystem (Rolin, 2020). Consequently, ensuring beneficial outcomes from the deployment of epistemic AI agents cannot be achieved by technical, model-level interventions alone. It requires the deliberate construction of a robust social and technical infrastructure for establishing provenance, verifying claims, and maintaining collective trust in our knowledge sys-tems. This entails not only technological solutions but also the cultivation of human resilience and the design of novel institutional structures, in-cluding new credentialing systems, verification protocols, and epistemological norms governing the use of AI in knowledge production. 

5.1. Technical infrastructure 

The foundation of a trustworthy multi-agent in-formation ecosystem we envision is a technical in-frastructure that makes epistemic processes trans-parent and auditable. In an era of epistemic AI agents working in complex, multi-step workflows where content is iteratively revised and synthe-sized, state-of-the-art provenance tools (such as SynthID, a watermarking tool (Dathathri et al., 2024))—which primarily indicate if content is AI-generated— offer necessary but not exhaus-tive solutions 9. The necessary evolution is from 

> 9Currently, these systems cannot handle AI-generated content that isn’t tagged, and even now AI may mislead without using AI-generated content (e.g. taking an image out of context). Conversely, AI-generation does not indicate untrustworthiness. For example, there are many valid us-ages of AI generation (e.g., small modifications of existing images, like removing a background).
> 14 Architecting Trust in Artificial Epistemic Agents

simple detection mechanisms to comprehensive accountability infrastructures capable of verify-ing who created a piece of content, why and un-der whose authority. Moreover, as agents begin to generate and contribute original knowledge autonomously, a robust framework will require tracking and verifying not only the outputs of AI models but also the origin of ideas and data, including specific agent instances and their au-thorization chains. However, this evolution has sparked debate; tracking authorship and verify-ing digital identities across a chain of custody poses risks to privacy, as such metadata could be exploited for surveillance (National Institute of Standards and Technology (US), 2024). Conse-quently, the design and implementation of such technical infrastructure requires a context-aware approach that prioritizes the protection of indi-vidual rights. 

Verifiable agent credentials and provenance chains. Moving beyond detection, a more ambi-tious requirement would be for agents to possess verifiable agent credentials (Chan et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2025a)—cryptographically secure and verifiable identity markers containing essen-tial metadata, such as the type of agent that may include an agent’s owner/developer, the version of model it’s running on and the pri-mary data it was trained on. These credentials, combined with mutual authentication processes (South et al., 2025), could ensure that an agent has been granted the necessary permission to per-form specific actions. This identity infrastructure could further serve as the technical foundation for enforcing containment through critical-need access. This involves placing agents within strict sandboxes where they are permitted to access only those tools and digital environments deemed critical to their specific objectives, requiring ex-plicit human approval for any privilege escala-tion. By conditioning system entry on these veri-fied markers, environments can dynamically re-strict agents to their specific authorization levels, operationalizing the principle of least privilege (Saltzer and Schroeder, 1975). In conjunction with cryptographically-signed provenance chains (e.g., (C2PA Technical Working Group, 2025; Na-tional Security Agency, Australian Signals Direc-torate, Candian Centre for Cyber Cecurity, Na-tional Cyber Security Centre, 2025)), these tech-nologies could enable greater transparency on content generation – allowing viewers to under-stand who created a piece of content, using what technology, and ensuring that the work of AI agents was truly authorized by the user that the content is tied to. 

Standardized communication and logging pro-tocols. Lastly, for agents to interact safely, they need a shared language not just for data, but for trust and process (Chan et al., 2025). Stan-dardized protocols could require agents to be transparent in their communications in the same way Agents-to-Payments Model (AP2) (Parikh and Surapaneni, 2025) and Model Context Pro-tocols (MCP) (Anthropic) standardize monetary exchanges, data access, and tool use. When Agent A queries Agent B, the exact query, its own creden-tials, and the purpose of the query could be logged in a standardized, immutable format. Agent B’s response would likewise include the requested data, its signature, and a summary of its own process (e.g., "This synthesis was generated from sources X, Y, and Z, which were weighted accord-ing to confidence metric M"). While scaling chal-lenges are non-negligible, such an infrastructure could also provide a clear protocol for dispute resolution. When two trustworthy agents provide conflicting information, a third, "verifier" agent could potentially be called to adjudicate (a po-tential extension of GuardAgents, as proposed by (Xiang et al., 2024)). The interaction logs from both conflicting agents would be made available for analysis. The verifier agent’s decision-making process, including its analysis of the conflicting provenance chains, would then itself be logged and auditable. 

5.2. Social infrastructure 

Beyond a robust technical infrastructure, a criti-cal component of a healthy information ecosys-tem is a resilient and discerning human popula-tion. Cultivating this resilience requires a multi-pronged approach focused on reinforcing human-led knowledge systems and enhancing the public’s capacity for critical inquiry. 

> 15 Architecting Trust in Artificial Epistemic Agents

Education and design for epistemic vigilance. 

First, building resilience demands a concerted ef-fort to cultivate epistemic vigilance in the popula-tion. This requires continued investment into edu-cation and a renewed emphasis on increased criti-cal inquiry and metacognitive training. AI literacy must also become a core civic competence, on par with digital literacy and reading skills as key edu-cational targets (Vallor, 2016). Curricula should be adapted to teach individuals how to question and probe AI-generated outputs, and to enhance their ability to understand the inner workings of the systems that produce the information they consume and rely on. This should be completed by thoughtful interface design. User interfaces can be designed to encourage critical engagement, such as clear visual cues to communicate the epis-temic status and certainty level of information. Accordingly, a statement derived from a high-quality peer-reviewed consensus could have a dif-ferent visual marker than one synthesized from a collection of blogs or opinion pieces for example. 

Support human epistemic stewards. Second, public and private stakeholders must strategically invest in our human-led systems of knowledge production by supporting the roles of academics, librarians, editors, public-interest journalists, ed-ucators and other knowledge workers as ethical stewards of information. These endeavors are an essential component of our collective epis-temic immune system, providing the diverse, orig-inal, and critically-examined insights needed to ground future AI systems. To counter the risks presented by scalable synthetic content, for ex-ample, we could also envisage the importance of creating and investing in things like ‘knowledge sanctuaries’—curated, human-vetted, and pro-tected datasets of foundational scientific, histori-cal, and cultural knowledge that serve as ground truth references—maintained by both local and global consortium of libraries, universities, and cultural heritage organizations. 

Collective norms and accountability mecha-nisms. Finally, fostering long-term resilience might require developing new institutional frame-works for governance and accountability. Impor-tantly, the legitimacy of such a framework might depend not on top-down directives from AI de-velopers, but on participatory processes that re-flect a broad societal consensus. This might be-gin with recognizing the principle of knowledge sovereignty, empowering communities to have meaningful control and a say over how their data and distinct epistemologies are represented and used by AI systems. Second, participatory gov-ernance mechanisms are essential for defining clear boundaries and norms of reliance. Public stakeholders must establish evaluation thresholds for what constitutes an epistemically trustwor-thy system, defining what level of factual error or failure in epistemic virtue is unacceptable for autonomous deployment in high-stakes domains like medicine or law. Third, this infrastructure requires robust mechanisms for redress and cor-rection. Our epistemic infrastructure could in-clude transparent processes for error correction and historical revision in AI models, allowing for the public logging of significant model updates or the retraction of demonstrably false outputs. Cru-cially, the design of these standards and norms must involve the direct participation of diverse stakeholders—including experts, educators, and community representatives—through delibera-tive, bottom-up processes (e.g. The Collective In-telligence Project) to ensure they serve the public interest. 

# 6. Discussion 

This paper has proposed a three-part framework to maximize the trustworthiness of epistemic AI agents focused on: (1) building for and cultivat-ing the epistemic trustworthiness of these AI sys-tems, (2) aligning future AI agents with human epistemic goals, and (3) reinforcing the surround-ing socio-technical epistemic infrastructure. Real-izing this vision, however, is not straightforward. It requires navigating a series of practical trade-offs and normative disagreements that merit care-ful considerations. This section discusses these core challenges and proposes specific avenues for future work to address them. A primary challenge lies in the practical ten-sions between aligning for long-term individual 

> 16 Architecting Trust in Artificial Epistemic Agents

epistemic agency and optimizing it for other de-sirable values, such as immediate helpfulness (e.g. (Ibrahim et al., 2025)). For example, an agent optimized to foster critical thought might nudge a user towards alternative or minority perspectives. From the user’s perspective, this additional con-text may be perceived as unhelpful, irrelevant or pedantic, creating a direct conflict between user satisfaction and epistemic responsibility. This ten-sion is equally acute when balancing the epis-temic preferences of an individual user against the broader epistemic health of society. Consider a user who genuinely wishes to explore a scien-tifically debunked conspiracy theory (e.g., Flat Earth). An agent strictly aligned with upholding that user’s preference to satisfy their curiosity might provide a comprehensive, non-judgmental deep-dive into that theory’s internal logic, key proponents, and "evidence” (or lack thereof) for the theory— even at the risk of legitimizing and amplifying it. Resolving those tensions in practice might entail designing systems that can navigate the trade off intelligently and transparently. At a foundational level, all agents could have a non-negotiable set of societal epistemic interests, such as refusing to generate content that incites vio-lence or poses a clear and immediate public health risk. Above this baseline, the agent’s default mode could be to introduce societal considerations as essential context while defaulting control to the user, facilitating a more dynamic and transparent alignment. A second trade-off exists between transparency and usability. While making an agent’s reasoning transparent is a core tenet of trustworthiness, de-tailed explanations can create cognitive overhead making responses lengthy and difficult to parse. Research indicates that when faced with complex explanations, users may either ignore them or, paradoxically, develop an over-reliance on the system, as the mere presence of an explanation can create misplaced confidence (Bansal et al., 2021). This places an undue cognitive burden of evaluating complex AI reasoning on the user, potentially undermining the goal of fostering crit-ical engagement. This challenge calls for more dedicated research into effective design patterns for presenting information, such as interactive explanation interfaces, that allow users to drill down into evidence behind claims and validate agent reasoning if they want a justification of the material presented to them (Zhou et al., 2025). Relatedly, the proposed emphasis on greater model transparency and process-based justifica-tion hinges on non-trivial advances in model in-terpretability. Current techniques like Chain-of-Thought (CoT) reasoning are often brittle and may act as post-hoc rationalizations rather than faithful traces of the model’s actual inference pro-cess (Chen et al., 2025; Turpin et al., 2023). How-ever, emerging research within the field of mech-anistic interpretability, which aims to reverse-engineer the specific neural circuits responsible for complex behaviors, could one day allow au-ditors to verify the actual computational path-ways an agent uses to weigh evidence or identify sources. Approaches like causal tracing enable researchers to pinpoint which pieces of informa-tion or internal representations were decisive in a conclusion by intervening in the model’s for-ward pass (e.g. Geva et al., 2023; Goldowsky-Dill et al., 2023; Meng et al., 2022, 2023). And data influence functions allow researchers to identify parts of the training data that are influential for a particular reasoning stream (Grosse et al., 2023; Koh and Liang, 2020; Ruis et al., 2025). While still nascent, these advances hold promise for grounding an agent’s claims in a genuine inferen-tial process. However, it is not guaranteed that these methods will scale to the largest frontier models, or that they can otherwise successfully provide explanations of circuits that may be ex-tremely complex or lacking analogy to human concepts. Our proposed framework also highlights im-portant tensions between standardization and paternalism: What is an optimal amount of cogni-tive "friction" for individuals? When are efforts to uphold these epistemic standards justified, and can AI systems be effectively trained to uphold them? The mixed responses to social media com-panies’ effort to curb misinformation on their plat-forms illustrates the difficulty of balancing apply-ing legal mandates to curb epistemic harms (e.g. fake news) without undermining epistemic val-ues such as freedom of expression (Aswad, 2019). The political economy of AI further complicates 

> 17 Architecting Trust in Artificial Epistemic Agents

this dynamic. As the industry moves towards monetization models predicated on user retention (Jin, 2025), developers must navigate the trade-off between building models that people actually want to use without impeding their long-term in-terests by optimizing for short-term metrics as a proxy for utility. Solving this coherently remains an open research challenge. While some users may resent AI that challenges them or makes them work harder (Buçinca et al., 2021), oth-ers may actively seek agents aligned with their deeper epistemic goals. A potential path forward could be the development of a "marketplace of epistemic models," where users can select sys-tems based on their preferred alignment philoso-phies. To function effectively, however, such a marketplace would require transparency through auditable standards, clear labeling, and indepen-dent benchmarking on critical metrics like epis-temic competence and falsifiability. Finally, the technical infrastructure pro-posed—from verifiable agent credentials to cryp-tographic provenance chains—is contingent upon widespread adoption and addressing existing in-frastructural gaps. If major developers or inter-mediaries were to opt out, it could create a frag-mented and vulnerable ecosystem, rendering the entire accountability structure porous. Overcom-ing this collective action problem will require a concerted effort toward standardization, inter-operability and regulation. While standards like C2PA are gaining traction among key stakehold-ers, they remain far from ubiquitous. This par-tial coverage creates second-order risks: the ab-sence of provenance labels could be weaponized to cast doubt on legitimate content, and the in-frastructure itself must be carefully architected to avoid enabling surveillance (Chan et al., 2024; National Institute of Standards and Technology (US), 2024). Ultimately, however, these mecha-nisms mainly address transparency rather than veracity; they reveal who generated content, but do not guarantee that the agent itself is trustwor-thy 10 .

> 10 A limitation mirrored in the application of cryptographic provenance to physical supply chains (Kromes et al., 2024; Mvubu and Naude, 2024).

# 7. Conclusion 

The potential emergence of autonomous epis-temic AI agents heralds a transformation in the production, dissemination, and evaluation of knowledge. In this paper, we have argued that navigating this transformation safely and ben-eficially requires a holistic, socio-technical ap-proach. We must concurrently align these agents with core human epistemic values, design them to be demonstrably trustworthy, and fortify the broader social and institutional ecosystem in which they will operate. As our discussion of the limitations makes clear, this is no simple task. The path is fraught with profound ethical con-siderations and practical design trade-offs. Yet, these challenges do not negate the necessity of the framework; they reinforce its urgency. The alternative—socially un-moored epistemic sys-tems—risks a further degradation of our already fragile collective episteme and missed opportuni-ties in terms of augmenting and bettering it. The crucial work ahead is thus to deliberately and collaboratively architect the epistemic future we wish to inhabit. 

# Acknowledgements 

The authors would like to thank Michiel Bakker, Rishub Jain, Sebastien Krier, Chris Bregler, Seth Lazar, Michael Collins, Krisztian Balog, Petra Grutzik and Andrew Trask for their insightful feedback and discussions throughout the devel-opment of this work. 

# References 

K. Abhari and R. Segal. Designing ai companions: A sartrean framework for human-centered sys-tems. 2025. C. Ackerman. Evidence for limited metacognition in LLMs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.21545 , Sept. 2025. E. Anderson. Democracy, public policy, and lay assessments of scientific testimony1. Episteme ,8(2):144–164, 2011. 

> 18 Architecting Trust in Artificial Epistemic Agents

Anthropic. Introducing the model context proto-col. https://www.anthropic.com/news/ model-context-protocol . Accessed: 2025-12-5. R. Appel, PeterMcCrory, A. Tamkin, M. Mc-Cain, T. Neylon, and M. Stern. The anthropic economic index report, 2025. URL https://assets.anthropic. com/m/218c82b858610fac/original/ Economic-Index.pdf .I. Arcuschin, J. Janiak, R. Krzyzanowski, S. Raja-manoharan, N. Nanda, and A. Conmy. Chain-of-Thought Reasoning In The Wild Is Not Always Faithful, June 2025. URL http://arxiv. org/abs/2503.08679 . arXiv:2503.08679 [cs]. H. Arendt and J. Kohn. Between past and future .Penguin Classics. Penguin Classics, May 2007. W. R. Arnold and M. Chakrabarti. The world has its first ai government of-ficial, 2025. URL https://www. wbur.org/onpoint/2025/10/23/ albania-ai-minister-intelligence .A. Askell, Y. Bai, A. Chen, D. Drain, D. Ganguli, T. Henighan, A. Jones, N. Joseph, B. Mann, N. DasSarma, et al. A general language as-sistant as a laboratory for alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.00861 , 2021. E. Aswad. In a world of ’fake news,’ what’s a social media company to do? Utah Law Rev. ,2020(4), Dec. 2019. I. Augenstein, T. Baldwin, M. Cha, T. Chakraborty, G. L. Ciampaglia, D. Corney, R. DiResta, E. Fer-rara, S. Hale, A. Halevy, E. Hovy, H. Ji, F. Menczer, R. Miguez, P. Nakov, D. Scheufele, S. Sharma, and G. Zagni. Factuality challenges in the era of large language models and oppor-tunities for fact-checking. Nat. Mach. Intell. , 6 (8):852–863, Aug. 2024. A. Azaria and T. Mitchell. The internal state of an LLM knows when it’s lying. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.13734 , Apr. 2023. H. Bai, J. G. Voelkel, S. Muldowney, J. C. Eich-staedt, and R. Willer. Llm-generated messages can persuade humans on policy issues. Nature Communications , 16(1):6037, 2025. Y. Bang, D. Chen, N. Lee, and P. Fung. Mea-suring political bias in large language models: What is said and how it is said. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.18932 , 2024. G. Bansal, T. Wu, J. Zhou, R. Fok, B. Nushi, E. Ka-mar, M. T. Ribeiro, and D. Weld. Does the whole exceed its parts? the effect of AI explanations on complementary team performance. In Pro-ceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , New York, NY, USA, May 2021. ACM. J. Bazinska, M. Mathys, F. Casucci, M. Rojas-Carulla, X. Davies, A. Souly, and N. Pfister. Breaking agent backbones: Evaluating the secu-rity of backbone llms in ai agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.22620 , 2025. J. Betley, X. Bao, M. Soto, A. Sztyber-Betley, J. Chua, and O. Evans. Tell me about your-self: LLMs are aware of their learned behaviors. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.11120 , Jan. 2025. J. Bi, S. Liang, X. Zhou, P. Liu, J. Guo, Y. Tang, L. Song, C. Huang, A. Vosoughi, G. Sun, J. He, J. Wu, S. Yang, D. Zhang, C. Chen, L. B. Wen, Z. Liu, J. Luo, and C. Xu. Why reasoning matters? a survey of advancements in mul-timodal reasoning (v1), 2025. URL https: //arxiv.org/abs/2504.03151 .J. W. Burton, E. Lopez-Lopez, S. Hechtlinger, Z. Rahwan, S. Aeschbach, M. A. Bakker, J. A. Becker, A. Berditchevskaia, J. Berger, L. Brinkmann, et al. How large language mod-els can reshape collective intelligence. Nature human behaviour , 8(9):1643–1655, 2024. Z. Buçinca, M. B. Malaya, and K. Z. Gajos. To trust or to think. Proc. ACM Hum. Comput. Interact. ,5(CSCW1):1–21, Apr. 2021. C2PA Technical Working Group. C2PA Con-tent Credentials Explained: Addressing Common Questions and Updates. Technical report, 2025. URL https://c2pa.org/ wp-content/uploads/sites/33/2025/ 10/content_credentials_wp_0925.pdf .

> 19 Architecting Trust in Artificial Epistemic Agents

H. Cappelen and J. Dever. Going whole hog: A philosophical defense of ai cognition, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2504. 13988 .K. M. Caramancion. Large language models vs. search engines: Evaluating user preferences across varied information retrieval scenarios, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2401. 05761 .A. Chan, N. Kolt, P. Wills, U. Anwar, C. S. de Witt, N. Rajkumar, L. Hammond, D. Krueger, L. Heim, and M. Anderljung. IDs for AI systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.12137 , June 2024. A. Chan, K. Wei, S. Huang, N. Rajkumar, E. Perrier, S. Lazar, G. K. Hadfield, and M. Anderljung. Infrastructure for AI agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.10114 , June 2025. A. Chatterji, T. Cunningham, D. Deming, Z. Hitzig, C. Ong, C. Shan, and K. Wad-man. How people use chatgpt, 2025. URL https://cdn.openai.com/pdf/ a253471f-8260-40c6-a2cc-aa93fe9f142e/ economic-research-chatgpt-usage-paper. pdf .Y. Chen, J. Benton, A. Radhakrishnan, J. Uesato, C. Denison, J. Schulman, A. Somani, P. Hase, M. Wagner, F. Roger, V. Mikulik, S. R. Bow-man, J. Leike, J. Kaplan, and E. Perez. Reason-ing models don’t always say what they think, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2505. 05410 .Z. Chen and R. Schmidt. Exploring a behavioral model of “positive friction” in human-AI inter-action. In Design, User Experience, and Usability ,Lecture notes in computer science, pages 3–22. Springer Nature Switzerland, Cham, 2024. S. Cheng, J. Li, H. Wang, and Y. Ma. Ragtrace: Un-derstanding and refining retrieval-generation dynamics in retrieval-augmented generation. In Proceedings of the 38th Annual ACM Sympo-sium on User Interface Software and Technology ,pages 1–20, 2025. S. Chern, Z. Hu, Y. Yang, E. Chern, Y. Guo, J. Jin, B. Wang, and P. Liu. BeHonest: Benchmark-ing honesty in large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.13261 , June 2024. W. Chow, J. Mao, B. Li, D. Seita, V. Guizilini, and Y. Wang. Physbench: Benchmarking and enhancing vision-language models for physical world understanding, 2025. URL https:// arxiv.org/abs/2501.16411 .S. S. Chowa, R. Alvi, S. S. Rahman, M. A. Rahman, M. A. K. Raiaan, M. R. Islam, M. Hussain, and S. Azam. From language to action: A review of large language models as autonomous agents and tool users, 2025. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2508.17281 .M. Chris. Elon musk launches encyclope-dia “fact-checked” by ai and aligning with rightwing views, Oct 2025. URL https: //www.theguardian.com/technology/ 2025/oct/28/elon-musk-grokipedia .K. Cobbe, V. Kosaraju, M. Bavarian, M. Chen, H. Jun, L. Kaiser, M. Plappert, J. Tworek, J. Hilton, R. Nakano, et al. Training verifiers to solve math word problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168 , 2021. M. Coeckelbergh. Ai and epistemic agency: How ai influences belief revision and its normative implications. Social Epistemology , pages 1–13, 2025. J. R. Cole, M. J. Q. Zhang, D. Gillick, J. M. Eisen-schlos, B. Dhingra, and J. Eisenstein. Selec-tively answering ambiguous questions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14613 , May 2023. T. H. Costello, G. Pennycook, and D. G. Rand. Durably reducing conspiracy beliefs through di-alogues with ai. Science , 385(6714):eadq1814, 2024. A. L. Cox, S. J. J. Gould, M. E. Cecchinato, I. Iaco-vides, and I. Renfree. Design frictions for mind-ful interactions. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Fac-tors in Computing Systems , pages 1389–1397, New York, NY, USA, May 2016. ACM. V. Danry, P. Pataranutaporn, Y. Mao, and P. Maes. Don’t just tell me, ask me: Ai systems that intelligently frame explanations as questions 

> 20 Architecting Trust in Artificial Epistemic Agents

improve human logical discernment accuracy over causal ai explanations. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pages 1–13, 2023. S. Dathathri, A. See, S. Ghaisas, P.-S. Huang, R. McAdam, J. Welbl, V. Bachani, A. Kaskasoli, R. Stanforth, T. Matejovicova, et al. Scalable watermarking for identifying large language model outputs. Nature , 634(8035):818–823, 2024. M. De Proost and G. Pozzi. Conversational artifi-cial intelligence and the potential for epistemic injustice. The American Journal of Bioethics , 23 (5):51–53, 2023. N. Dziri, X. Lu, M. Sclar, X. L. Li, L. Jiang, B. Y. Lin, P. West, C. Bhagavatula, R. L. Bras, J. D. Hwang, S. Sanyal, S. Welleck, X. Ren, A. Ettinger, Z. Har-chaoui, and Y. Choi. Faith and fate: Limits of transformers on compositionality, 2023. URL 

## https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.18654 .C. Z. Elgin. Epistemic agency. Theory and research in education , 11(2):135–152, 2013. S. Es, J. James, L. Espinosa Anke, and S. Schock-aert. RAGAs: Automated evaluation of retrieval augmented generation. In Proceedings of the 18th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Sys-tem Demonstrations , pages 150–158, Strouds-burg, PA, USA, 2024. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. O. Evans, O. Cotton-Barratt, L. Finnveden, A. Bales, A. Balwit, P. Wills, L. Righetti, and W. Saunders. Truthful ai: Developing and governing ai that does not lie. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.06674 , 2021. F. Fabiano. Comprehensive multi-agent epistemic planning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.08301 ,2021. S. Feng, T. Sorensen, Y. Liu, J. Fisher, C. Y. Park, Y. Choi, and Y. Tsvetkov. Modular pluralism: Pluralistic alignment via multi-LLM collabora-tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.15951 , June 2024. A. Ferdman. Ai, deskilling, and the prospects for public reason. Minds and Machines , 35(3): 1–27, 2025. O. Freiman and B. Miller. Can artificial entities assert? In The Oxford Handbook of Assertion ,pages 415–436. Oxford University Press, 2020. E. Fricker. On the metaphysical and epistemic contrasts between human and ai testimony. In-quiry , pages 1–26, 2025. K. Frost-Arnold. Moral trust & scientific collab-oration. Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part A , 44(3):301–310, 2013. S. Fulay, D. Dimitrakopoulou, and D. Roy. The empty chair: Using llms to raise missing per-spectives in policy deliberations, 2025a. URL 

## https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.13812 .S. Fulay, J. Zhu, and M. Bakker. From dele-gates to trustees: How optimizing for long-term interests shapes bias and alignment in llm, 2025b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2510.12689 .I. Gabriel, A. Manzini, G. Keeling, L. A. Hendricks, V. Rieser, H. Iqbal, N. Tomašev, I. Ktena, Z. Ken-ton, M. Rodriguez, et al. The ethics of advanced ai assistants. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.16244 ,2024. A. Galashov, M. Jones, R. Ke, Y. Cao, V. Nagarajan, and M. C. Mozer. Catch your breath: Adaptive computation for self-paced sequence produc-tion, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2510.13879 .T. Gao, H. Yen, J. Yu, and D. Chen. Enabling large language models to generate text with citations. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14627 , May 2023. M. Geva, J. Bastings, K. Filippova, and A. Glober-son. Dissecting Recall of Factual Associa-tions in Auto-Regressive Language Models, Oct. 2023. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2304. 14767 . arXiv:2304.14767 [cs]. A. I. Goldman. What is justified belief? In Justifi-cation and knowledge: New studies in epistemol-ogy , pages 1–23. Springer, 1979. 

> 21 Architecting Trust in Artificial Epistemic Agents

A. I. Goldman. Experts: Which ones should you trust? Philosophy and phenomenological re-search , 63(1):85–110, 2001. N. Goldowsky-Dill, C. MacLeod, L. Sato, and A. Arora. Localizing Model Behavior with Path Patching, May 2023. URL http://arxiv. org/abs/2304.05969 . arXiv:2304.05969 [cs]. J. Gottweis, W.-H. Weng, A. Daryin, T. Tu, A. Palepu, P. Sirkovic, A. Myaskovsky, F. Weis-senberger, K. Rong, R. Tanno, K. Saab, D. Popovici, J. Blum, F. Zhang, K. Chou, A. Has-sidim, B. Gokturk, A. Vahdat, P. Kohli, Y. Matias, A. Carroll, K. Kulkarni, N. Tomasev, Y. Guan, V. Dhillon, E. D. Vaishnav, B. Lee, T. R. D. Costa, J. R. Penadés, G. Peltz, Y. Xu, A. Pawlosky, A. Karthikesalingam, and V. Natarajan. To-wards an ai co-scientist, 2025. URL https: //arxiv.org/abs/2502.18864 .Z. Gou, Z. Shao, Y. Gong, Y. Shen, Y. Yang, N. Duan, and W. Chen. CRITIC: Large language models can self-correct with tool-interactive cri-tiquing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.11738 , May 2023. R. Greenblatt, B. Shlegeris, K. Sachan, and F. Roger. AI control: Improving safety de-spite intentional subversion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.06942 , Dec. 2023. E. Greussing, L. Guenther, A. Baram-Tsabari, S. Dabran-Zivan, E. Jonas, I. Klein-Avraham, M. Taddicken, T. E. Agergaard, B. Beets, D. Brossard, A. Chakraborty, A. Fage-Butler, C.-J. Huang, S. Kankaria, Y.-Y. Lo, K. H. Nielsen, M. Riedlinger, and H. Song. The perception and use of generative ai for science-related information search: Insights from a cross-national study. Public Understanding of Sci-ence , 34(5):599–615, 2025. doi: 10.1177/ 09636625241308493. URL https://doi. org/10.1177/09636625241308493 . PMID: 39891412. C. Griffin, D. Wallace, J. Mateos-Garcia, H. Schieve, and P. Kohli. A new golden age of discovery, 2024. URL https: //deepmind.google/public-policy/ ai-for-science/ .R. Grosse, J. Bae, C. Anil, N. Elhage, A. Tamkin, A. Tajdini, B. Steiner, D. Li, E. Durmus, E. Perez, E. Hubinger, K. Lukoši ¯ut ˙e, K. Nguyen, N. Joseph, S. McCandlish, J. Kaplan, and S. R. Bowman. Studying Large Language Model Generalization with Influence Functions, Aug. 2023. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2308. 03296 . arXiv:2308.03296 [cs]. N. Guha, J. Nyarko, D. Ho, C. Ré, A. Chilton, A. Chohlas-Wood, A. Peters, B. Waldon, D. Rock-more, D. Zambrano, et al. Legalbench: A collab-oratively built benchmark for measuring legal reasoning in large language models. Advances in neural information processing systems , 36: 44123–44279, 2023. A. Gunjal, A. Wang, E. Lau, V. Nath, Y. He, B. Liu, and S. Hendryx. Rubrics as rewards: Rein-forcement learning beyond verifiable domains, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2507. 17746 .H. Gunn and M. P. Lynch. The internet and epis-temic agency. In Applied Epistemology . Oxford University Press, 2021. Y. Guo, M. Guo, J. Su, Z. Yang, M. Zhu, H. Li, M. Qiu, and S. S. Liu. Bias in large language models: Origin, evaluation, and mitigation. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.10915 , 2024. J. Habermas and T. Burger. The structural transformation of the public sphere. https: //mitpress.mit.edu/9780262581080/ the-structural-transformation-of-the-public-

Dec. 2021. Accessed: 2025-12-5. K. Hackenburg, B. M. Tappin, L. Hewitt, E. Saun-ders, S. Black, H. Lin, C. Fist, H. Margetts, D. G. Rand, and C. Summerfield. The levers of political persuasion with conversational ai, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2507. 13919 .L. Hammond, A. Chan, J. Clifton, J. Hoelscher-Obermaier, A. Khan, E. McLean, C. Smith, W. Barfuss, J. Foerster, T. Gavenčiak, et al. Multi-agent risks from advanced ai. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.14143 , 2025. J. Hardwig. Epistemic dependence. The Journal of philosophy , 82(7):335–349, 1985. 

> 22 Architecting Trust in Artificial Epistemic Agents

J. Hardwig. The role of trust in knowledge. The journal of philosophy , 88(12):693–708, 1991. G. He, X. Song, and A. Sun. Knowledge up-dating? no more model editing! just se-lective contextual reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.05212 , Mar. 2025. D. Hendrycks, C. Burns, S. Basart, A. Zou, M. Mazeika, D. Song, and J. Steinhardt. Mea-suring massive multitask language understand-ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.03300 , Sept. 2020. M. T. Hicks, J. Humphries, and J. Slater. Chatgpt is bullshit. Ethics and Information Technology ,26(2):1–10, 2024. A. Hila. The epistemological consequences of large language models: rethinking collective intelligence and institutional knowledge. AI & Society , pages 1–19, 2025. W. Hua, L. Fan, L. Li, K. Mei, J. Ji, Y. Ge, L. Hemphill, and Y. Zhang. War and peace (waragent): Large language model-based multi-agent simulation of world wars. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.17227 , 2023. J. Huang, X. Chen, S. Mishra, H. S. Zheng, A. W. Yu, X. Song, and D. Zhou. Large language models cannot self-correct reasoning yet. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.01798 , Oct. 2023. J.-t. Huang, J. Zhou, T. Jin, X. Zhou, Z. Chen, W. Wang, Y. Yuan, M. R. Lyu, and M. Sap. On the resilience of llm-based multi-agent col-laboration with faulty agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.00989 , 2024. K. Huang, V. S. Narajala, J. Yeoh, J. Ross, R. Raskar, Y. Harkati, J. Huang, I. Habler, and C. Hughes. A novel zero-trust identity frame-work for agentic AI: Decentralized authenti-cation and fine-grained access control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.19301 , May 2025a. M. Huang, Y. Long, X. Deng, R. Chu, J. Xiong, X. Liang, H. Cheng, Q. Lu, and W. Liu. Di-alogGen: Multi-modal interactive dialogue system with multi-turn text-image gener-ation. In L. Chiruzzo, A. Ritter, and L. Wang, editors, Findings of the Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2025 , pages 411–426, Albuquerque, New Mex-ico, Apr. 2025b. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. ISBN 979-8-89176-195-7. doi: 10.18653/v1/2025.findings-naacl. 25. URL https://aclanthology.org/ 2025.findings-naacl.25/ .S. Huang and D. Siddarth. Generative ai and the digital commons. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.11074 , 2023. Y. Huang, Y. Chen, H. Zhang, K. Li, H. Zhou, M. Fang, L. Yang, X. Li, L. Shang, S. Xu, J. Hao, K. Shao, and J. Wang. Deep re-search agents: A systematic examination and roadmap, 2025c. URL https://arxiv.org/ abs/2506.18096 .L. Ibrahim, F. S. Hafner, and L. Rocher. Training language models to be warm and empathetic makes them less reliable and more sycophantic. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.21919 , July 2025. A. Jacovi, A. Wang, C. Alberti, C. Tao, J. Lipovetz, K. Olszewska, L. Haas, M. Liu, N. Keating, A. Bloniarz, et al. The facts grounding leader-board: Benchmarking llms’ ability to ground responses to long-form input. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.03200 , 2025. B. Jin. What sam altman told OpenAI about the secret device he’s making with jony ive. The Wall Street Journal , May 2025. D. Jin, E. Pan, N. Oufattole, W.-H. Weng, H. Fang, and P. Szolovits. What disease does this patient have? a large-scale open domain question an-swering dataset from medical exams. Applied Sciences , 11(14):6421, 2021. S. Johnson. Ai’s role in preserv-ing digital archives, 2025. URL 

## https://www.historica.org/blog/ ais-role-in-preserving-digital-archives .T. Ju, Y. Wang, X. Ma, P. Cheng, H. Zhao, Y. Wang, L. Liu, J. Xie, Z. Zhang, and G. Liu. Flood-ing spread of manipulated knowledge in llm-based multi-agent communities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.07791 , 2024. 

> 23 Architecting Trust in Artificial Epistemic Agents

I. Jurenka, M. Kunesch, K. R. McKee, D. Gillick, S. Zhu, S. Wiltberger, S. M. Phal, K. Her-mann, D. Kasenberg, A. Bhoopchand, A. Anand, M. Pîslar, S. Chan, L. Wang, J. She, P. Mah-moudieh, A. Rysbek, W.-J. Ko, A. Huber, B. Wiltshire, G. Elidan, R. Rabin, J. Rubi-novitz, A. Pitaru, M. McAllister, J. Wilkowski, D. Choi, R. Engelberg, L. Hackmon, A. Levin, R. Griffin, M. Sears, F. Bar, M. Mesar, M. Jab-bour, A. Chaudhry, J. Cohan, S. Thiagara-jan, N. Levine, B. Brown, D. Gorur, S. Grant, R. Hashimshoni, L. Weidinger, J. Hu, D. Chen, K. Dolecki, C. Akbulut, M. Bileschi, L. Culp, W.-X. Dong, N. Marchal, K. V. Deman, H. B. Misra, M. Duah, M. Ambar, A. Caciularu, S. Lef-dal, C. Summerfield, J. An, P.-A. Kamienny, A. Mohdi, T. Strinopoulous, A. Hale, W. Ander-son, L. C. Cobo, N. Efron, M. Ananda, S. Mo-hamed, M. Heymans, Z. Ghahramani, Y. Matias, B. Gomes, and L. Ibrahim. Towards responsi-ble development of generative ai for education: An evaluation-driven approach, 2025. URL 

## https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.12687 .S. Kadavath, T. Conerly, A. Askell, T. Henighan, D. Drain, E. Perez, N. Schiefer, Z. Hatfield-Dodds, N. DasSarma, E. Tran-Johnson, et al. Language models (mostly) know what they know. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.05221 , 2022. A. T. Kalai, O. Nachum, S. S. Vempala, and E. Zhang. Why language models hallucinate. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.04664 , Sept. 2025. A. Kasirzadeh and I. Gabriel. Characteriz-ing ai agents for alignment and governance, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2504. 21848 .J. Kay, A. Kasirzadeh, and S. Mohamed. Epistemic injustice in generative ai. In Proceedings of the AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society ,volume 7, pages 684–697, 2024. M. Kazemi, B. Fatemi, H. Bansal, J. Palowitch, C. Anastasiou, S. V. Mehta, L. K. Jain, V. Aglietti, D. Jindal, Y. P. Chen, et al. Big-bench extra hard. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 26473–26501, 2025. H. R. Kirk, B. Vidgen, P. Röttger, and S. A. Hale. The benefits, risks and bounds of personaliz-ing the alignment of large language models to individuals. Nature Machine Intelligence , 6(4): 383–392, 2024. J. Kleinberg and M. Raghavan. Algorithmic mono-culture and social welfare. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 118(22), May 2021. ISSN 1091-6490. doi: 10.1073/pnas. 2018340118. URL http://dx.doi.org/10. 1073/pnas.2018340118 .N. Köbis, J.-F. Bonnefon, and I. Rahwan. Bad machines corrupt good morals. Nature human behaviour , 5(6):679–685, 2021. P. W. Koh and P. Liang. Understanding Black-box Predictions via Influence Functions, Dec. 2020. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1703. 04730 . arXiv:1703.04730 [stat]. G. Kostopoulos, V. Gkamas, M. Rigou, and S. Kot-siantis. Agentic ai in education: State of the art and future directions. IEEE Access , 2025. R. Kromes, T. Li, M. Bouillon, T. E. Güler, V. van der Hulst, and Z. Erkin. Fear of Miss-ing Out: Constrained Trial of Blockchain in Supply Chain. Sensors , 24(3):986, Jan. 2024. ISSN 1424-8220. doi: 10.3390/s24030986. URL https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/ 24/3/986 . Publisher: Multidisciplinary Digi-tal Publishing Institute. J. Kuai, C. Brantner, M. Karlsson, E. Van Couver-ing, and S. Romano. Ai chatbot accountability in the age of algorithmic gatekeeping: Compar-ing generative search engine political informa-tion retrieval across five languages. new media & society , page 14614448251321162, 2025. J. Kulveit, R. Douglas, N. Ammann, D. Turan, D. Krueger, and D. Duvenaud. Gradual dis-empowerment: Systemic existential risks from incremental ai development. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.16946 , 2025. T. Lanham, A. Chen, A. Radhakrishnan, B. Steiner, C. Denison, D. Hernandez, D. Li, E. Dur-mus, E. Hubinger, J. Kernion, K. Lukoši ¯ut ˙e, K. Nguyen, N. Cheng, N. Joseph, N. Schiefer, 

> 24 Architecting Trust in Artificial Epistemic Agents

O. Rausch, R. Larson, S. McCandlish, S. Kundu, S. Kadavath, S. Yang, T. Henighan, T. Maxwell, T. Telleen-Lawton, T. Hume, Z. Hatfield-Dodds, J. Kaplan, J. Brauner, S. R. Bow-man, and E. Perez. Measuring Faithful-ness in Chain-of-Thought Reasoning, July 2023. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2307. 13702 . arXiv:2307.13702 [cs]. W. Laurito, B. Davis, P. Grietzer, T. Gavenčiak, A. Böhm, and J. Kulveit. Ai–ai bias: Large language models favor communications gen-erated by large language models. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 122(31): e2415697122, 2025. S. Lazar. Frontier ai ethics: Anticipating and eval-uating the societal impacts of language model agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.06750 , 2024. S. Lazar. Anticipatory ai ethics, 2025. URL https://knightcolumbia.org/ content/anticipatory-ai-ethics .S. Lazar and L. Manuali. Can llms advance demo-cratic values? arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.08418 ,2024. H. H. Le, V. S. T. Nguyen, T. L. C. Dang, V. T. K. Nguyen, T. T. H. Nguyen, and H. Cao. Multi-media verification through multi-agent deep research multimodal large language models. In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM International Conference on Multimedia , pages 14034–14040, 2025. LearnLM Team, A. Modi, A. S. Veerubhotla, A. Rysbek, A. Huber, A. Anand, A. Bhoopc-hand, B. Wiltshire, D. Gillick, D. Kasenberg, E. Sgouritsa, G. Elidan, H. Liu, H. Win-nemoeller, I. Jurenka, J. Cohan, J. She, J. Wilkowski, K. Alarakyia, K. R. McKee, K. Singh, L. Wang, M. Kunesch, M. Pîslar, N. Efron, P. Mahmoudieh, P.-A. Kamienny, S. Wiltberger, S. Mohamed, S. Agarwal, S. M. Phal, S. J. Lee, T. Strinopoulos, W.-J. Ko, Y. Gold-Zamir, Y. Haramaty, and Y. Assael. Evaluating gemini in an arena for learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.24477 , May 2025. G. . E. LearnLM Team. Ai tutoring can safely and effectively support students: An exploratory rct in uk classrooms. Technical report, 2025. URL https://storage.googleapis.com/ deepmind-media/LearnLM/learnLM_ nov25.pdf .H.-P. Lee, A. Sarkar, L. Tankelevitch, I. Drosos, S. Rintel, R. Banks, and N. Wilson. The im-pact of generative ai on critical thinking: Self-reported reductions in cognitive effort and con-fidence effects from a survey of knowledge workers. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI con-ference on human factors in computing systems ,pages 1–22, 2025. J. E. Lewis, H. Whaanga, and C. Yolgörmez. Abun-dant intelligences: placing AI within indige-nous knowledge frameworks. AI Soc. , 40(4): 2141–2157, Apr. 2025. P. Lewis, E. Perez, A. Piktus, et al. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. Advances in Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems , 33:9459–9474, 2020. A. O. Li and T. Goyal. Memorization vs. reasoning: Updating LLMs with new knowledge. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.12523 , Apr. 2025. H. Li, S. De, M. Revel, A. Haupt, B. Miller, K. Cole-man, J. Baxter, M. Saveski, and M. Bakker. Scal-ing human judgment in community notes with llms. Journal of Online Trust and Safety , 3(1), Sept. 2025. ISSN 2770-3142. doi: 10.54501/ jots.v3i1.255. URL http://dx.doi.org/10. 54501/jots.v3i1.255 .J. Li, X. Cheng, W. X. Zhao, J.-Y. Nie, and J.-R. Wen. Halueval: A large-scale hallucination eval-uation benchmark for large language models. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.11747 , 2023. M. Li, Y. Zhao, W. Zhang, S. Li, W. Xie, S.-K. Ng, T.-S. Chua, and Y. Deng. Knowledge boundary of large language models: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.12472 , Dec. 2024a. S. Li, C. Yang, T. Wu, C. Shi, Y. Zhang, X. Zhu, Z. Cheng, D. Cai, M. Yu, L. Liu, et al. A survey on the honesty of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.18786 , 2024b. S. Lin, J. Hilton, and O. Evans. TruthfulQA: Mea-suring how models mimic human falsehoods. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.07958 , Sept. 2021. 

> 25 Architecting Trust in Artificial Epistemic Agents

N. F. Lindemann. Chatbots, search engines, and the sealing of knowledges. AI & Society , 40(6): 5063–5076, 2025. J. Liu, Z. Qiu, Z. Li, Q. Dai, W. Yu, J. Zhu, M. Hu, M. Yang, T.-S. Chua, and I. King. A survey of personalized large language models: Progress and future directions, 2025. URL https:// arxiv.org/abs/2502.11528 .C. Lu, C. Lu, R. T. Lange, J. Foerster, J. Clune, and D. Ha. The ai scientist: Towards fully automated open-ended scientific discovery, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2408. 06292 .F. Luciano. Hypersuasion–on ai’s persuasive power and how to deal with it. Philosophy & Technology , 37(2):64, 2024. S. M. Lundberg and S.-I. Lee. A unified approach to interpreting model predictions. Advances in neural information processing systems , 30, 2017. A. Malek, J. Ge, N. Lazic, C. Jin, A. György, and C. Szepesvári. Frontier llms still struggle with simple reasoning tasks, 2025. URL https:// arxiv.org/abs/2507.07313 .A. Manzini, G. Keeling, L. Alberts, S. Vallor, M. R. Morris, and I. Gabriel. The code that binds us: Navigating the appropriateness of human-ai assistant relationships. In Proceedings of the AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society ,volume 7, pages 943–957, 2024. K. Marino, M. Rastegari, A. Farhadi, and R. Mot-taghi. Ok-vqa: A visual question answer-ing benchmark requiring external knowledge, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1906. 00067 .S. Marro and P. Torr. Llm agents are the antidote to walled gardens. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.23978 , 2025. K. Meng, D. Bau, A. Andonian, and Y. Belinkov. Locating and Editing Factual Associations in GPT. 2022. K. Meng, A. S. Sharma, A. Andonian, Y. Belinkov, and D. Bau. Mass-Editing Memory in a Trans-former, Aug. 2023. URL http://arxiv.org/ abs/2210.07229 . arXiv:2210.07229 [cs]. L. Messeri and M. J. Crockett. Artificial intelli-gence and illusions of understanding in scien-tific research. Nature , 627(8002):49–58, 2024. G. Mialon, C. Fourrier, T. Wolf, Y. LeCun, and T. Scialom. Gaia: a benchmark for general ai assistants. In The Twelfth International Confer-ence on Learning Representations , 2023. S. Min, K. Krishna, X. Lyu, M. Lewis, W.-t. Yih, P. Koh, M. Iyyer, L. Zettlemoyer, and H. Ha-jishirzi. Factscore: Fine-grained atomic eval-uation of factual precision in long form text generation. In Proceedings of the 2023 Confer-ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 12076–12100, 2023. M. Monti. Automated journalism and freedom of information: Ethical and juridical problems related to ai in the press field. Opinio Juris in Comparatione , 1:2018, 2019. B. Mucsányi, M. Kirchhof, and S. J. Oh. Bench-marking Uncertainty Disentanglement: Specialized Uncertainties for Specialized Tasks. Advances in Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems , 37:50972–51038, Dec. 2024. doi: 10.52202/079017-1614. URL https://proceedings.neurips. cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/ 5afa9cb1e917b898ad418216dc726fbd-Abstract-Dat and_Benchmarks_Track.html .N. Muennighoff, Z. Yang, W. Shi, X. L. Li, L. Fei-Fei, H. Hajishirzi, L. Zettlemoyer, P. Liang, E. Candès, and T. Hashimoto. s1: Simple test-time scaling, 2025. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2501.19393 .M. Mvubu and M. J. Naude. Blockchain in the logistics sector: A systematic literature review of benefits and constraints. Journal of Transport and Supply Chain Management , 18(0):10, Sept. 2024. ISSN 1995-5235. doi: 10.4102/jtscm. v18i0.1068. URL https://jtscm.co.za/ index.php/jtscm/article/view/1068 .

> 26 Architecting Trust in Artificial Epistemic Agents

J. Myung, N. Lee, Y. Zhou, J. Jin, R. Putri, D. Anty-pas, H. Borkakoty, E. Kim, C. Perez-Almendros, A. A. Ayele, et al. Blend: A benchmark for llms on everyday knowledge in diverse cultures and languages. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:78104–78146, 2024. National Institute of Standards and Technology (US). Reducing risk posed by synthetic con-tent an overview of technical approaches to digital content transparency. Technical report, National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD, Nov. 2024. National Security Agency, Australian Signals Directorate, Candian Centre for Cyber Cecurity, National Cyber Security Centre. Content Cre-dentials: Strengthening Multimedia Integrity in the Generative AI Era. Technical report, 2025. URL https://media.defense.gov/ 2025/Jan/29/2003634788/-1/-1/0/ CSI-CONTENT-CREDENTIALS.PDF .A. Nguyen, M. Kremantzis, A. Essien, I. Petrou-nias, and S. Hosseini. Enhancing student en-gagement through artificial intelligence (ai): Understanding the basics, opportunities, and challenges. Journal of University Teaching and Learning Practice , 21(6):1–13, 2024. S. U. Noble. Algorithms of oppression: How search engines reinforce racism. In Algorithms of oppression . New York university press, 2018. A. Novikov, N. V ˜u, M. Eisenberger, E. Dupont, P.-S. Huang, A. Z. Wagner, S. Shirobokov, B. Ko-zlovskii, F. J. R. Ruiz, A. Mehrabian, M. P. Kumar, A. See, S. Chaudhuri, G. Holland, A. Davies, S. Nowozin, P. Kohli, and M. Ba-log. AlphaEvolve: A coding agent for scien-tific and algorithmic discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.13131 , June 2025. L. Pacchiardi, A. J. Chan, S. Mindermann, I. Moscovitz, A. Y. Pan, Y. Gal, O. Evans, and J. Brauner. How to catch an AI liar: Lie de-tection in black-box LLMs by asking unrelated questions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.15840 ,Sept. 2023. S. Parikh and R. Surapaneni. Announc-ing agent payments protocol (AP2). 

## https://cloud.google.com/blog/ products/ai-machine-learning/ announcing-agents-to-payments-ap2-protocol ,Sept. 2025. Accessed: 2025-12-5. J. Parker-Holder and S. Fruchter. Genie 3: A new frontier for world models, 2025. URL https://deepmind.google/blog/ genie-3-a-new-frontier-for-world-models/ .R. H. Perlis, D. A. Christakis, N. M. Bressler, D. Öngür, J. Kendall-Taylor, A. Flanagin, and K. Bibbins-Domingo. Artificial intelligence in peer review. JAMA , 334(17), 2025. Y. Potter, S. Lai, J. Kim, J. Evans, and D. Song. Hidden persuaders: Llms’ political leaning and their influence on voters, 2024. URL https: //arxiv.org/abs/2410.24190 .V. Prabhakaran, A. Mostafazadeh Davani, and M. Diaz. On releasing annotator-level labels and information in datasets. In C. Bonial and N. Xue, editors, Proceedings of the Joint 15th Lin-guistic Annotation Workshop (LAW) and 3rd De-signing Meaning Representations (DMR) Work-shop , pages 133–138, Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, Nov. 2021. Association for Compu-tational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021. law-1.14. URL https://aclanthology. org/2021.law-1.14/ .C. Qian, B. He, Z. Zhuang, J. Deng, Y. Qin, X. Cong, Z. Zhang, J. Zhou, Y. Lin, Z. Liu, and M. Sun. Tell me more! towards implicit user intention understanding of language model driven agents, 2024. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2402.09205 .S. Rathje, M. Ye, L. Globig, R. Pillai, V. de Mello, and J. Van Bavel. Sycophantic ai increases atti-tude extremity and overconfidence. 2025. J. Reis-Andersson. Exploring ai’s role in promot-ing lifelong learning. In 3rd Symposium on AI Opportunities and Challenges (SAIOC 2025): The march of AI as a facilitator of change, ACI Academic Conferences International, 2025 ,2025. A. K. Reshmy, J. Sunkara, and R. Kumari. Re-defining operating system design: Integrating 

> 27 Architecting Trust in Artificial Epistemic Agents

large language models as core components. In 

2025 12th International Conference on Com-puting for Sustainable Global Development (IN-DIACom) , pages 1–6, 2025. doi: 10.23919/ INDIACom66777.2025.11115792. C. Riedl and D. De Cremer. Ai for collec-tive intelligence. Collective Intelligence , 4(2): 26339137251328909, 2025. K. Rolin. Trust in science. In The Routledge hand-book of trust and philosophy , pages 354–366. Routledge, 2020. L. Ruis, M. Mozes, J. Bae, S. R. Kamalakara, D. Talupuru, A. Locatelli, R. Kirk, T. Rock-täschel, E. Grefenstette, and M. Bartolo. Procedural Knowledge in Pretraining Drives Reasoning in Large Language Models, Mar. 2025. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2411. 12580 . arXiv:2411.12580 [cs]. J. Russell, M. Karpinska, D. Akinode, K. Thai, B. Emi, M. Spero, and M. Iyyer. Ai use in amer-ican newspapers is widespread, uneven, and rarely disclosed, 2025. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2510.18774 .S. Russell and P. Norvig. Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach . Pearson, 4th edition, 2020. J. H. Saltzer and M. D. Schroeder. The protection of information in computer systems. Proc. IEEE Inst. Electr. Electron. Eng. , 63(9):1278–1308, Sept. 1975. F. Salvi, M. Horta Ribeiro, R. Gallotti, and R. West. On the conversational persuasiveness of gpt-4. 

Nature Human Behaviour , pages 1–9, 2025. P. Schoenegger, F. Salvi, J. Liu, X. Nan, R. Deb-nath, B. Fasolo, E. Leivada, G. Recchia, F. Gün-ther, A. Zarifhonarvar, J. Kwon, Z. U. Is-lam, M. Dehnert, D. Y. H. Lee, M. G. Rei-necke, D. G. Kamper, M. Kobaş, A. Sand-ford, J. Kgomo, L. Hewitt, S. Kapoor, K. Ok-tar, E. E. Kucuk, B. Feng, C. R. Jones, I. Gains-burg, S. Olschewski, N. Heinzelmann, F. Cruz, B. M. Tappin, T. Ma, P. S. Park, R. Onyonka, A. Hjorth, P. Slattery, Q. Zeng, L. Finke, I. Gross-mann, A. Salatiello, and E. Karger. Large language models are more persuasive than incentivized human persuaders, 2025. URL 

## https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.09662 .K. Setiya. Epistemic agency: Some doubts. Philo-sophical Issues , 23:179–198, 2013. A. V. Shah, T. South, T. Evans, H. R. Kirk, A. Trask, E. G. Weyl, and M. A. Bakker. Robust ai per-sonalization via the human context protocol. 

SSRN preprint 5403981 , 2025. C. Shah and E. M. Bender. Situating search. In Pro-ceedings of the 2022 Conference on Human In-formation Interaction and Retrieval , pages 221– 232, 2022. L. Sharkey, B. Chughtai, J. Batson, J. Lind-sey, J. Wu, L. Bushnaq, N. Goldowsky-Dill, S. Heimersheim, A. Ortega, J. Bloom, et al. Open problems in mechanistic interpretability. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.16496 , 2025. N. Sharma, Q. V. Liao, and Z. Xiao. Generative echo chamber? effect of llm-powered search systems on diverse information seeking. In 

Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Hu-man Factors in Computing Systems , pages 1–17, 2024. H. Shi, Z. Xu, H. Wang, W. Qin, W. Wang, Y. Wang, Z. Wang, S. Ebrahimi, and H. Wang. Con-tinual learning of large language models: A comprehensive survey. ACM Comput. Surv. ,58(5), Nov. 2025a. ISSN 0360-0300. doi: 10.1145/3735633. URL https://doi.org/ 10.1145/3735633 .Z. Shi, S. Gao, X. Chen, Y. Feng, L. Yan, H. Shi, D. Yin, P. Ren, S. Verberne, and Z. Ren. Learn-ing to use tools via cooperative and interactive agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.03031 , 2024. Z. Shi, S. Gao, L. Yan, Y. Feng, X. Chen, Z. Chen, D. Yin, S. Verberne, and Z. Ren. Tool learn-ing in the wild: Empowering language mod-els as automatic tool agents. In Proceedings of the ACM on Web Conference 2025 , WWW ’25, page 2222–2237, New York, NY, USA, 2025b. Association for Computing Machin-ery. ISBN 9798400712746. doi: 10.1145/ 3696410.3714825. URL https://doi.org/ 10.1145/3696410.3714825 .

> 28 Architecting Trust in Artificial Epistemic Agents

N. Shinn, F. Cassano, A. Gopinath, et al. Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.11366 ,2023. T. Sorensen, J. Moore, J. Fisher, M. Gordon, N. Mireshghallah, C. M. Rytting, A. Ye, L. Jiang, X. Lu, N. Dziri, T. Althoff, and Y. Choi. A roadmap to pluralistic alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.05070 , Feb. 2024. E. Sosa. Epistemic agency. The journal of philoso-phy , 110(11):585–605, 2013. A. Souly, J. Rando, E. Chapman, X. Davies, B. Hasircioglu, E. Shereen, C. Mougan, V. Mavroudis, E. Jones, C. Hicks, et al. Poi-soning attacks on llms require a near-constant number of poison samples. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.07192 , 2025. T. South, S. Marro, T. Hardjono, R. Mahari, C. D. Whitney, D. Greenwood, A. Chan, and A. Pent-land. Authenticated delegation and authorized AI agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.09674 ,Jan. 2025. S. E. Spatharioti, D. Rothschild, D. G. Goldstein, and J. M. Hofman. Effects of LLM-based search on decision making: Speed, accuracy, and over-reliance. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Confer-ence on Human Factors in Computing Systems ,volume 1, pages 1–15, New York, NY, USA, Apr. 2025. ACM. A. Srivastava, A. Rastogi, A. Rao, A. A. M. Shoeb, A. Abid, A. Fisch, A. R. Brown, A. Santoro, A. Gupta, A. Garriga-Alonso, A. Kluska, A. Lewkowycz, A. Agarwal, A. Power, A. Ray, A. Warstadt, A. W. Kocurek, A. Safaya, A. Tazarv, A. Xiang, A. Parrish, A. Nie, A. Hus-sain, A. Askell, A. Dsouza, A. Slone, A. Ra-hane, A. S. Iyer, A. Andreassen, A. Madotto, A. Santilli, A. Stuhlmüller, A. Dai, A. La, A. Lampinen, A. Zou, A. Jiang, A. Chen, A. Vuong, A. Gupta, A. Gottardi, A. Norelli, A. Venkatesh, A. Gholamidavoodi, A. Tabas-sum, A. Menezes, A. Kirubarajan, A. Mullokan-dov, A. Sabharwal, A. Herrick, A. Efrat, A. Er-dem, A. Karakaş, B. R. Roberts, B. S. Loe, B. Zoph, B. Bojanowski, B. Özyurt, B. Heday-atnia, B. Neyshabur, B. Inden, B. Stein, B. Ek-mekci, B. Y. Lin, B. Howald, B. Orinion, C. Diao, C. Dour, C. Stinson, C. Argueta, C. F. Ramírez, C. Singh, C. Rathkopf, C. Meng, C. Baral, C. Wu, C. Callison-Burch, C. Waites, C. Voigt, C. D. Manning, C. Potts, C. Ramirez, C. E. Rivera, C. Siro, C. Raffel, C. Ashcraft, C. Garbacea, D. Sileo, D. Garrette, D. Hendrycks, D. Kilman, D. Roth, D. Freeman, D. Khashabi, D. Levy, D. M. González, D. Perszyk, D. Hernandez, D. Chen, D. Ippolito, D. Gilboa, D. Dohan, D. Drakard, D. Jurgens, D. Datta, D. Ganguli, D. Emelin, D. Kleyko, D. Yuret, D. Chen, D. Tam, D. Hup-kes, D. Misra, D. Buzan, D. C. Mollo, D. Yang, D.-H. Lee, D. Schrader, E. Shutova, E. D. Cubuk, E. Segal, E. Hagerman, E. Barnes, E. Donoway, E. Pavlick, E. Rodola, E. Lam, E. Chu, E. Tang, E. Erdem, E. Chang, E. A. Chi, E. Dyer, E. Jerzak, E. Kim, E. E. Manyasi, E. Zheltonozhskii, F. Xia, F. Siar, F. Martínez-Plumed, F. Happé, F. Chollet, F. Rong, G. Mishra, G. I. Winata, G. de Melo, G. Kruszewski, G. Parascandolo, G. Mariani, G. Wang, G. Jaimovitch-López, G. Betz, G. Gur-Ari, H. Galijasevic, H. Kim, H. Rashkin, H. Hajishirzi, H. Mehta, H. Bogar, H. Shevlin, H. Schütze, H. Yakura, H. Zhang, H. M. Wong, I. Ng, I. Noble, J. Jumelet, J. Geissinger, J. Kernion, J. Hilton, J. Lee, J. F. Fisac, J. B. Simon, J. Koppel, J. Zheng, J. Zou, J. Kocoń, J. Thompson, J. Wingfield, J. Ka-plan, J. Radom, J. Sohl-Dickstein, J. Phang, J. Wei, J. Yosinski, J. Novikova, J. Bosscher, J. Marsh, J. Kim, J. Taal, J. Engel, J. Alabi, J. Xu, J. Song, J. Tang, J. Waweru, J. Burden, J. Miller, J. U. Balis, J. Batchelder, J. Berant, J. Frohberg, J. Rozen, J. Hernandez-Orallo, J. Boudeman, J. Guerr, J. Jones, J. B. Tenenbaum, J. S. Rule, J. Chua, K. Kanclerz, K. Livescu, K. Krauth, K. Gopalakrishnan, K. Ignatyeva, K. Markert, K. D. Dhole, K. Gimpel, K. Omondi, K. Math-ewson, K. Chiafullo, K. Shkaruta, K. Shrid-har, K. McDonell, K. Richardson, L. Reynolds, L. Gao, L. Zhang, L. Dugan, L. Qin, L. Contreras-Ochando, L.-P. Morency, L. Moschella, L. Lam, L. Noble, L. Schmidt, L. He, L. O. Colón, L. Metz, L. K. Şenel, M. Bosma, M. Sap, M. ter Hoeve, M. Farooqi, M. Faruqui, M. Mazeika, M. Bat-uran, M. Marelli, M. Maru, M. J. R. Quin-tana, M. Tolkiehn, M. Giulianelli, M. Lewis, M. Potthast, M. L. Leavitt, M. Hagen, M. Schu-

> 29 Architecting Trust in Artificial Epistemic Agents

bert, M. O. Baitemirova, M. Arnaud, M. McEl-rath, M. A. Yee, M. Cohen, M. Gu, M. Ivanit-skiy, M. Starritt, M. Strube, M. Swędrowski, M. Bevilacqua, M. Yasunaga, M. Kale, M. Cain, M. Xu, M. Suzgun, M. Walker, M. Tiwari, M. Bansal, M. Aminnaseri, M. Geva, M. Gheini, M. V. T, N. Peng, N. A. Chi, N. Lee, N. G.-A. Krakover, N. Cameron, N. Roberts, N. Do-iron, N. Martinez, N. Nangia, N. Deckers, N. Muennighoff, N. S. Keskar, N. S. Iyer, N. Constant, N. Fiedel, N. Wen, O. Zhang, O. Agha, O. Elbaghdadi, O. Levy, O. Evans, P. A. M. Casares, P. Doshi, P. Fung, P. P. Liang, P. Vicol, P. Alipoormolabashi, P. Liao, P. Liang, P. Chang, P. Eckersley, P. M. Htut, P. Hwang, P. Miłkowski, P. Patil, P. Pezeshkpour, P. Oli, Q. Mei, Q. Lyu, Q. Chen, R. Ban-jade, R. E. Rudolph, R. Gabriel, R. Habacker, R. Risco, R. Millière, R. Garg, R. Barnes, R. A. Saurous, R. Arakawa, R. Raymaekers, R. Frank, R. Sikand, R. Novak, R. Sitelew, R. LeBras, R. Liu, R. Jacobs, R. Zhang, R. Salakhutdi-nov, R. Chi, R. Lee, R. Stovall, R. Teehan, R. Yang, S. Singh, S. M. Mohammad, S. Anand, S. Dillavou, S. Shleifer, S. Wiseman, S. Gruet-ter, S. R. Bowman, S. S. Schoenholz, S. Han, S. Kwatra, S. A. Rous, S. Ghazarian, S. Ghosh, S. Casey, S. Bischoff, S. Gehrmann, S. Schuster, S. Sadeghi, S. Hamdan, S. Zhou, S. Srivastava, S. Shi, S. Singh, S. Asaadi, S. S. Gu, S. Pachchi-gar, S. Toshniwal, S. Upadhyay, Shyamolima, Debnath, S. Shakeri, S. Thormeyer, S. Melzi, S. Reddy, S. P. Makini, S.-H. Lee, S. Torene, S. Hatwar, S. Dehaene, S. Divic, S. Ermon, S. Biderman, S. Lin, S. Prasad, S. T. Pianta-dosi, S. M. Shieber, S. Misherghi, S. Kiritchenko, S. Mishra, T. Linzen, T. Schuster, T. Li, T. Yu, T. Ali, T. Hashimoto, T.-L. Wu, T. Desbordes, T. Rothschild, T. Phan, T. Wang, T. Nkinyili, T. Schick, T. Kornev, T. Tunduny, T. Gersten-berg, T. Chang, T. Neeraj, T. Khot, T. Shultz, U. Shaham, V. Misra, V. Demberg, V. Nyamai, V. Raunak, V. Ramasesh, V. U. Prabhu, V. Pad-makumar, V. Srikumar, W. Fedus, W. Saun-ders, W. Zhang, W. Vossen, X. Ren, X. Tong, X. Zhao, X. Wu, X. Shen, Y. Yaghoobzadeh, Y. Lakretz, Y. Song, Y. Bahri, Y. Choi, Y. Yang, Y. Hao, Y. Chen, Y. Belinkov, Y. Hou, Y. Hou, Y. Bai, Z. Seid, Z. Zhao, Z. Wang, Z. J. Wang, Z. Wang, and Z. Wu. Beyond the imitation game: Quantifying and extrapolating the ca-pabilities of language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.04615 , June 2022. M. Stadler, M. Bannert, and M. Sailer. Cognitive ease at a cost: Llms reduce mental effort but compromise depth in student scientific inquiry. 

Computers in Human Behavior , 160:108386, 2024. M. Steiner, M. Magin, B. Stark, and S. Geiß. Seek and you shall find? a content analysis on the diversity of five search engines’ results on po-litical queries. Information, Communication & Society , 25(2):217–241, 2022. J. Stilgoe, R. Owen, and P. Macnaghten. Devel-oping a framework for responsible innovation. 

Research Policy , 42(9):1568–1580, 2013. W. Su, C. Wang, Q. Ai, Y. Hu, Z. Wu, Y. Zhou, and Y. Liu. Unsupervised real-time halluci-nation detection based on the internal states of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.06448 , 2024. A. Sud and C. Bregler. Exploring the con-text of online images with backstory. 

## https://deepmind.google/blog/ exploring-the-context-of-online-images-with-

Accessed: 2025-12-4. W. Sun, X. Zhou, W. Du, X. Wang, S. Welleck, G. Neubig, M. Sap, and Y. Yang. Training proac-tive and personalized llm agents, 2025. URL 

## https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.02208 .X. Sun, R. Ma, X. Zhao, Z. Li, J. Lindqvist, A. E. Ali, and J. A. Bosch. Trusting the search: Un-raveling human trust in health information from google and chatgpt, 2024. URL https: //arxiv.org/abs/2403.09987 .M. Suzgun, T. Gur, F. Bianchi, D. E. Ho, T. Icard, D. Jurafsky, and J. Zou. Language models can-not reliably distinguish belief from knowledge and fact. Nature Machine Intelligence , pages 1–11, 2025. S. H. Tanneru, C. Agarwal, and H. Lakkaraju. Quantifying uncertainty in natural language 

> 30 Architecting Trust in Artificial Epistemic Agents

explanations of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.03533 , Nov. 2023. Y. Tao, O. Viberg, R. S. Baker, and R. F. Kizilcec. Cultural bias and cultural alignment of large language models. PNAS nexus , 3(9):pgae346, 2024. A. Taubenfeld, T. Sheffer, E. Ofek, A. Feder, A. Goldstein, Z. Gekhman, and G. Yona. Con-fidence improves self-consistency in LLMs. In W. Che, J. Nabende, E. Shutova, and M. T. Pile-hvar, editors, Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025 , pages 20090–20111, Stroudsburg, PA, USA, July 2025. Association for Computational Linguis-tics. M. H. Tessler, M. A. Bakker, D. Jarrett, H. Shea-han, M. J. Chadwick, R. Koster, G. Evans, L. Campbell-Gillingham, T. Collins, D. C. Parkes, et al. Ai can help humans find common ground in democratic deliberation. Science , 386 (6719):eadq2852, 2024. The Collective Intelligence Project. Global dialogues. https://www.cip.org/ globaldialogues . Accessed: 2025-12-5. K. Tian, E. Mitchell, A. Zhou, A. Sharma, R. Rafailov, H. Yao, C. Finn, and C. D. Man-ning. Just ask for calibration: Strategies for eliciting calibrated confidence scores from lan-guage models fine-tuned with human feedback. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14975 , May 2023. N. Tomasev, M. Franklin, J. Z. Leibo, J. Jacobs, W. A. Cunningham, I. Gabriel, and S. Osin-dero. Virtual agent economies. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.10147 , 2025. H. Tomisu, J. Ueda, and T. Yamanaka. The cog-nitive mirror: A framework for ai-powered metacognition and self-regulated learning. In Frontiers in Education , volume 10, page 1697554. Frontiers, 2025. V. Tupe and S. Thube. Ai agentic workflows and enterprise apis: Adapting api architectures for the age of ai agents, 2025. URL https:// arxiv.org/abs/2502.17443 .M. Turpin, J. Michael, E. Perez, and S. R. Bow-man. Language models don’t always say what they think: Unfaithful explanations in chain-of-thought prompting, 2023. URL https: //arxiv.org/abs/2305.04388 .S. Vallor. Technology and the virtues . Oxford Uni-versity Press, New York, NY, Nov. 2016. J. Van Dijck. Search engines and the production of academic knowledge. International journal of cultural studies , 13(6):574–592, 2010. H. Wan, B. Fang, and Y. Liu. A general multi-agent epistemic planner based on higher-order be-lief change. Artificial Intelligence , 301:103562, 2021. C. Wang, X. Liu, Y. Yue, Q. Guo, X. Hu, X. Tang, T. Zhang, C. Jiayang, Y. Yao, X. Hu, Z. Qi, W. Gao, Y. Wang, L. Yang, J. Wang, X. Xie, Z. Zhang, and Y. Zhang. Survey on factual-ity in large language models. ACM Comput. Surv. , 58(1):1–37, Jan. 2026. Y. Wang, X. Ma, G. Zhang, Y. Ni, A. Chandra, S. Guo, W. Ren, A. Arulraj, X. He, Z. Jiang, et al. Mmlu-pro: A more robust and challenging multi-task language understanding benchmark. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-tems , 37:95266–95290, 2024. B. Wasik. Ai is poised to rewrite history. liter-ally, 2025. URL https://web.archive. org/web/20250616093722/https://www. nytimes.com/2025/06/16/magazine/ ai-history-historians-scholarship. html .J. Wei, Y. Yang, X. Zhang, Y. Chen, X. Zhuang, Z. Gao, D. Zhou, G. Wang, Z. Gao, J. Cao, Z. Qiu, M. Hu, C. Ma, S. Tang, J. He, C. Song, X. He, Q. Zhang, C. You, S. Zheng, N. Ding, W. Ouyang, N. Dong, Y. Cheng, S. Sun, L. Bai, and B. Zhou. From ai for science to agentic science: A survey on autonomous scientific discovery, 2025. URL 

## https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.14111 .G. Weiss. Multiagent systems: a modern approach to distributed artificial intelligence . MIT press, 1999. 

> 31 Architecting Trust in Artificial Epistemic Agents

B. Wen. The missing reward: Active infer-ence in the era of experience. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.05619 , Aug. 2025. Y. Weng, M. Zhu, G. Bao, H. Zhang, J. Wang, Y. Zhang, and L. Yang. Cycleresearcher: Im-proving automated research via automated re-view. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.00816 , 2024. T. Wilholt. Epistemic trust in science. The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science , 2013. S. Williams and J. Huckle. Easy problems that llms get wrong, 2024. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2405.19616 .A. W. Woolley and P. Gupta. Understanding col-lective intelligence: Investigating the role of collective memory, attention, and reasoning processes. Perspectives on Psychological Science ,19(2):344–354, 2024. S. Woźniak, B. Koptyra, A. Janz, P. Kazienko, and J. Kocoń. Personalized large language mod-els. In 2024 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining Workshops (ICDMW) , pages 511– 520, 2024. doi: 10.1109/ICDMW65004.2024. 00071. F. Wu, E. Black, and V. Chandrasekaran. Gener-ative monoculture in large language models. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.02209 , 2024. Y. Wu, Z. Sun, S. Li, S. Welleck, and Y. Yang. Inference scaling laws: An empirical anal-ysis of compute-optimal inference for LLM problem-solving. In The Thirteenth Inter-national Conference on Learning Representa-tions , 2025. URL https://openreview. net/forum?id=VNckp7JEHn .X. Xian, G. Wang, X. Bi, J. Srinivasa, A. Kundu, C. Fleming, M. Hong, and J. Ding. On the vulnerability of applying retrieval-augmented generation within knowledge-intensive applica-tion domains. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.17275 ,2024. Z. Xiang, L. Zheng, Y. Li, J. Hong, Q. Li, H. Xie, J. Zhang, Z. Xiong, C. Xie, C. Yang, D. Song, and B. Li. GuardAgent: Safeguard LLM agents by a guard agent via knowledge-enabled reasoning. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.09187 , June 2024. M. Xiong, Z. Hu, X. Lu, Y. Li, J. Fu, J. He, and B. Hooi. Can LLMs express their uncertainty? an empirical evaluation of confidence elicita-tion in LLMs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.13063 ,June 2023. W. Xu, C. Huang, S. Gao, and S. Shang. Llm-based agents for tool learning: A survey: W. xu et al. Data Science and Engineering , pages 1–31, 2025a. Y. Xu, P. Qi, J. Chen, K. Liu, R. Han, L. Liu, B. Min, V. Castelli, A. Gupta, and Z. Wang. Citeeval: Principle-driven citation evaluation for source attribution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.01829 ,2025b. H. Yakura, E. Lopez-Lopez, L. Brinkmann, I. Serna, P. Gupta, I. Soraperra, and I. Rahwan. Empirical evidence of large language model’s influence on human spoken communication, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2409. 01754 .J. Yang, R. Tan, Q. Wu, R. Zheng, B. Peng, Y. Liang, Y. Gu, M. Cai, S. Ye, J. Jang, Y. Deng, and J. Gao. Magma: A foundation model for mul-timodal ai agents. In 2025 IEEE/CVF Confer-ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-tion (CVPR) , pages 14203–14214, 2025a. doi: 10.1109/CVPR52734.2025.01325. X.-W. Yang, J.-J. Shao, L.-Z. Guo, B.-W. Zhang, Z. Zhou, L.-H. Jia, W.-Z. Dai, and Y.-F. Li. Neuro-symbolic artificial intelligence: Towards im-proving the reasoning abilities of large lan-guage models, 2025b. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2508.13678 .A. Ye, J. Moore, R. Novick, and A. X. Zhang. Language models as critical thinking tools: A case study of philosophers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.04516 , 2024. G. Yehudai, H. Kaplan, A. Ghandeharioun, M. Geva, and A. Globerson. When can trans-formers count to n?, 2024. URL https:// arxiv.org/abs/2407.15160 .J. A. Yeung, J. Dalmasso, L. Foschini, R. J. Dobson, and Z. Kraljevic. The psychogenic machine: Simulating ai psychosis, delusion reinforce-ment and harm enablement in large language 

> 32 Architecting Trust in Artificial Epistemic Agents

models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.10970 ,2025. Z. Yin. A review of methods for alleviat-ing hallucination issues in large language models. https://www.ewadirect.com/ proceedings/ace/article/view/13770 .Accessed: 2025-12-5. X. Zeng, X. Wang, T. Zhang, C. Yu, S. Zhao, and Y. Chen. Gesturegpt: Toward zero-shot free-form hand gesture understanding with large language model agents. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction , 8(ISS):462– 499, 2024. Q. Zhan, Z. Liang, Z. Ying, and D. Kang. Injeca-gent: Benchmarking indirect prompt injections in tool-integrated large language model agents. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.02691 , 2024. Q. Zhang, B. Zeng, C. Zhou, G. Go, H. Shi, and Y. Jiang. Human-imperceptible retrieval poi-soning attacks in llm-powered applications. In 

Companion Proceedings of the 32nd ACM Inter-national Conference on the Foundations of Soft-ware Engineering , pages 502–506, 2024. J. Zheng, S. Qiu, C. Shi, and Q. Ma. Towards lifelong learning of large language models: A survey. ACM Comput. Surv. , 57(8), Mar. 2025. ISSN 0360-0300. doi: 10.1145/3716629. URL 

## https://doi.org/10.1145/3716629 .R. Zhou, G. Nguyen, N. Kharya, A. Nguyen, and C. Agarwal. Improving human verification of LLM reasoning through interactive explanation interfaces. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.22922 ,Oct. 2025. M. Zhuge, W. Wang, L. Kirsch, F. Faccio, D. Khizbullin, and J. Schmidhuber. Language agents as optimizable graphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.16823 , 2024. W. Zou, R. Geng, B. Wang, and J. Jia. 

{PoisonedRAG }: Knowledge corruption attacks to {Retrieval-Augmented } generation of large language models. In 34th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 25) , pages 3827– 3844, 2025.